MYSTIC TREATISES BY
ISAAC OF NINEVEH
TRANSLATED FROM BEDJAN'S SYRIAC TEXT
WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND REGISTERS
WENSINCK
A.
J.
VERHANDELINGEN DER. KONINKEIJKE AKADEMIE
VAN WETENSCHAPPEN" TE AMSTERDAM
AFDEELING LETTERKUNDE
NIEUVVE REEKS
DEEL XXIII Nn . 1
UITGAVE DER
KONINKLIJKE AKADEMIE VAN WETENSCHAPPEN
AMSTERDAM
1923

SIX TREATISES ON THE BEHAVIOUR OF
EXCELLENCE
J
)
I
The fear of God is the foundation ofexcellence ; for excellence
is said to be the offspring of faith. It is sown in a man's heart,
when he allows his mind to confine the wandering impulses to
continual meditation on the order of things to come, away
from the distractions of the world. As to the foundation of
2 excellence, the first among its peculiar elements is the concen-
tration of the self, by freeing it from practical things, upon
the enlightened word of the straight and holy ways, the word
that by the inspired Psalmist is called the teacher.
There is scarcely to be found a man who is able to bear
honours, or possibly such an one exists not because man is
;
very prone to err, even if he be an angel in his way.
The foundation of the way of life consists in accustoming
the mind to the words of God and the practice of patience.
For the draught provided by the former is helpful towards
acquiring perfection in the latter; and, further, increased devel-
opment towards accomplishment in the latter, will cause a
heightened desire of the former. And the help provided by
both of them will quickly bring about the rise of the whole
building.
No one is able to come near to God save only he who is
far from the world. For I do not call separation the departure
from the body, but from the bodily things.
Excellence consists therein that a man in his mind be a void
as regards the world. As long as the senses are occupied with
[outward] things, it is not possible for the heart to rest from
I) Title taken from the end of VI on p. 99. All reference applies to the pages of
Bedjan's text.
Verh. AW. I.etterk. 192= jWenslnck...

2 SIX TREATISES OX THE BEHAVIOUR OF EXCELEKXCE
imagining them. Nor do the affections cease, nor evil thoughts
end except in the desert and the wilderness.
While the soul has not yet become drunk by the faith in
God, in that it has received an impression of its powers, the
weakness of the senses cannot be healed and it is not able to
tread down with force visible matter which is a screen before
what is within and not perceived [by the senses].
3 Reason is the cause of freedom1 ) and the fruit of both liability
to err. Without the first, the second cannot be. And where the
second fails, there is the third bound as it were with halters.
When grace is abundant in man, then the fear of death is
despised on account of the love of righteousness. He finds
many arguments in his soul [proving} that it is becoming to bear
troubles for the sake of the fear of God. And those things
which are supposed to injure the body, and to repel nature
injustly, which consequently are of a nature to cause suffering,
are reckoned in his eye as nothing in comparison with what
is expected to be. And his mind convinces him firmly of the
fact that it is not possible to recognize truth without gaining
experience of the affections, and that God bestows great care
upon man, and that he is not abandoned to chance. Especially
those who are trained in praying unto Him and who bear
suffering for His sake, see [these truths] clearly [as if painted]
in colours. But when little faith takes root in our heart, then
all these things are felt as contrary, not as serving for testing us.
And that we are not always successful in trusting in God,
and that God does not care for thee as it is supposed, is often
insinuated by those who lay ambushes and shoot their arrows
in the darkness.
The foundation of man's true life, is the fear of God. And
this does not consent to dwell in the soul as long as there
4 exists the distraction of [outward] things. For the heart, by the
service of the senses, is turned away from the delight in God.
The inward impulses are bound up in their sensible faculty
with the senses administering to them.
The doubt of the heart introduces fear into the soul. But
faith is able to make manly the mind, even under the cutting
off of the limbs. As long as the love of the body is strong in
thee, thou art not able to be courageous and without fear
i) Tliis term lias lv.-aily always Uie meaning of free will. Cf. Introduction.

SIX TREATISES OS TEIK BEHAVIOUR OF EXCELLENCE 3
because of the many adversaries that are constantly present
in the neighbourhood of him who is loved.
If any one is fond of honour, he cannot be without causes
of distress.
There is no man, whose mind suffers not likewise a change
with things, in whatever respect it may be.
If there is a second apperception ofthe senses, which generates
and gives birth to desire, as Euagrius says, then those who
dwell in doubt must keep silence, promising to preserve their
mind in peace.
Not that one is chaste from whom evil impulses that intended
to combat him, are withheld, but he whose uprightness of
heart renders chaste the gaze of his mind, so that he does not
audaciously enter upon lascivious thoughts and the saintliness
;
of his heart is testified by the gaze of his pupils, which are
guarded faithfully, so that bashfulness screens, like a curtain,
the hidden place of his thoughts. So that his purity x like
),
that of a chaste virgin, is faithfully guarded for Christ.
There is nothing so apt to banish lascivious customs from
the soul, and to restrain inciting memories which quicken the
wild flames in the body, as burning for the love of teachings,
and prosecuting investigations concerning the meaning of the
5 words of the scriptures.
When the impulses are immersed in delight, after [having
tasted] the wisdom contained in the [divine] words, by means
of the faculty that absorbs information from them, then every
man will leave the body behind him. Forgetting the world and
all that is in it, he will also banish from his soul all recollec-
tions on which are based the images of the material world.
And often the soul in its thoughts duri — ng ecstasy will desi—st
from the use of the wonted deliberations natural practice
by reason of the novel [experiences] which reach it from the
sea of their mysteries.
Even when the mind is floating on its upper waters, without
being able to make its impulses deep as the depth of t—he
waters (so that it can see all the treasures in its abysses)
still meditation, by its [power of] love, will have sufficient force
to bind the thoughts firmly together with thoughts of ecstasy
so that they are checked from thinking of and running after
I) Reading cn^CUA.! in stead of CO&CUA.1

4 SIX TREATISES OX THE BEHAVIOUR OF EXCELLENCE
the nature of the body. As one of those, who are clad with
God says: "Because the heart is weak, it is not able to bear
the evil influences that reach it from without, nor the struggle
within. For you know, that the evil thoughts of the body are
strong. And if the heart is not accustomed to teachings, it is
not possible to bear the troubled thoughts of the body.
As the heaviness of the weight [impedes] the quick swaying
too and frojri of the tongue of the balance in the wild winds,
so bashfulness and fear [impede] the aberration of the mind.
And that which is an indication of deficiency in the former,
is also a [sign] of the dominion of freedom ') in the latter.
6 Just as in that case any additional decrease is the cause of the
scales swaying too and froo with greater ease, having no solid
foundation, so in this case, by the abolition of fear from the
soul on account of freedom, the balance o[ the mind is able
to turn aside quickly. So the faculty of emotion comes in the
consequence of freedom; and inconstancy of the mind is the
consequence of the faculty of aberration3 Be wise enough to
).
la)- a foundation for thy course in the way of God ; in a few
days it will bring thee before the gate of the Kingdom, without
windings in the way 3 ).
Do not in the way of those who are educated by teachers
look at the words which in the way of test, are intended to
elevate thy behaviour, in order that thy soul may be elevated
by the height of sight that is in them. Distinguish the purport
of the word in all the stories thou findest in the scriptures ; so
thou wilt be able to make thy soul deep so that it may dwell
with the great wisdom that is in thewaitings ofenlightened men.
Those who, by grace, are directed in their behaviour towards
illumination, perceive constantly as it were an intelligible ray
running between the words [of the scriptures]. This ray dis-
tinguishes for the mind the simple speech from those things
that are said in spiritual loftiness in order to expand the soul.
He who simply reads lofty words, his heart will also remain
simple and devoid of the holy power, that imparts to the heart
a sweet taste by the meanings that stupefy the soul.
7 All things are accustomed to move towards that which is
1) Cf. p. 2 note I.
2) Cf. Introduction.
3) Cf. Book of the Dove, Sentence 85: "Every serene soul seeks its original country,and
directs itself towards it on the straight way, which is the nearest-'. And the inscription of
chapter XVII: On the short paths to God.

'
SIX TREATISES ON THE BEHAVIOUR OK EXCELLENCE
5
akin [to them]. And the soul that possesses something of the
spirit, on hearing anything wherein a spiritual force is hidden,
fervently embraces that which it hears; and yet a tale that is
told spiritually and wherein a great force is hidden, is not able
to arouse every one unto admiration.
A word concerning excellence requires a heart free from
the earth and earthly occupations.
If a man's mind is beset with care for transitory things,
tales concerning excellence will not incite his thought to the
desiring of its possession.
Solution from matter precedes the bonds in God l ). And
though, as if by Providence of Grace, in some people the latter
precede the former, so that love covers love, in the usual order
of Providence the common sequence is otherwise. So thou hast
to keep the common order. If Grace in thee comes first, it is
for its own sake. If it does not, then, along the way that every
man goes by tradition, ascend the spiritual tower.
Everything which is mentally performed and the command-
ment of which is fulfilled thus also, is entirely invisible to the
eyes of the flesh; whereas every thing which is performed in
practice, is wholly of a composite nature. For it is only one
commandment that necessitates these two, viz. theory and per-
formance. Because corporeity and non-corporeity and the adap-
5 tation of — the two belong to all. Therefore the enlightened
intellect — as has been ordered formerly by the blessed
Moses understands in a twofold way the commandment
[lying at the bottom of theory and practice] the simple as
:
well as the complex is understood.
Works performed carefully by the pure, do not remove the
impression of the recollection of previous reprehensible things
;
but they abolish in the mind the painful nature of recollection,
so that what has passed through the mind often enough, now
becomes something excellent.
The longing of the soul for the acquiring of excellence
vanquishes the desire of its partner 3 ) for visible things.
1) Cf. beneath p. 40 and Basilius: Aaui^xi Set rfo Ssr/ih t?; ^jttxW*; tou (3/ou tj>
T x i p e W o ^ « t x W Ti f l f * v h t t e 3 c i( v S X e Z f t O i y r t e i v p x J o o v T t C o i v v f & t l o v y - z y x y i i x r x / o X j. r s x ; ?.A T o x t v x t r t x ft x ^ ( o x i A t o n t t / x i o o l n v i r u S o s i t x* e h t ^ h r ir o M e O a ix x ^ p i - / ' m o * - u ' j s . , xe—v p x . i P 2 l T 2 o T ) t O . i v n S u A x s i n , d , E * n P m n hi c r l a x o lc I t s .u 3 r I 8 x V ; 0 , . 39 . S, :
§ the I s p o o u i l n : ts iir t i o rTf t g h Q e el P r l x at J o ) ni t c />o o ? ri » g « i ) n «> of hu t e h r e ix c i om r p e ar i i x so t n S , v a Ss n r d /ia u v s , es xx i l t x h v i x m p s x e f l s f ei § v 4 . _, .. s . p-aking of
2) the body

6 SIX TREATISES ON THE BEHAVIOUR OK EXCELLENCE
All things have their mean. Lacking that, even those things
the use of which is apt to help, may turn aside and become
harmful without meeting any obstacle.
If thou wishest to have mental communion with God, by
acquiring the impression of that delight that is not subject to
the senses, then cling to mercy. For the holy beauty is formed
by that element within thee, which resembles mercy l And
).
all the practices of mercy bring the soul, immediately, into
communion with the unique splendour of the divine glory'2
).
Spiritual unification is a perpetual recollection, that is vivid
in the heart without variation, with burning love. By constancy
9 in clinging to the commandments, it acquires the force to remain
in union and there is found, in a way neither secondary nor
;
natural, matter for spiritual vision, in which the soul may
confide absolutely. So a man is drawn towards ecstasy by the
closing of the two classes of senses those of the flesh and
:
those o( the soul. There is no other way towards spiritual love
which is modeller of invisible images, than to begin in the first
place with mercy in accordance with the word of our Lord
who commands it to those who obey him, in connection with
the perfection of the Father, the foundation.
Very different is the word of practice from words of beauty.
Even without experience wisdom knows how to adorn its words
and to speak the truth even without having any acquaintance
with it, and to express itself concerning excellence without any
experience of [practical] performance. A word proceeding from
practice, is a treasure to confide in. But idle wisdom is a pawn
causing shame ; it is as when an artist paints water on walls,
without being able to quench his thirst by it•, or as a man
who dreams beautiful dreams.
He who from practical experience speaks about excellence,
brings the word to his hearers as it were from the capital
won by his own commerce; and, as from the stock of his
soul, sows his teachings in the ears of his audience. He opens
his mouth freely before his spiritual sons, in the manner of
old Jacob before chaste Joseph, [saying] : I have given thee
one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand
of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow 3
).
1) ReadiDg cnl instead of cn\ .
2) Cf. Chapter I.XXXI.
3) Genesis 48,22.

SIX TREATISES ON THE BEHAVIOUR OF EXCELLENCE J
10 So every man whose behaviour is stained, will love temporal
life ; so will also he who falls short of knowledge. Some one
has well said: The fear of death distresses a fleshly man. But
he who has a good witness in himself, will desire it as life.
Do not reckon as a truly wise man that one whose mind
is subject to fear on account of temporal life.
All good and evil things which befall the body have all
of them, to be reckoned by thee as dreams, which thou canst
escape from not only by death, but which often leave thee
even before death and disappear.
If thy soul is bound to some of them, then estimate them as
thy possession for ever, accompanying" thee also in the world
to be. If they are beautiful, then rejoice and thank God in
thy mind. If they are evil, then be sorry and sigh and seek
to be delivered from them while being in the body. If any
good is done to thee, open or concealed, then be sure that
thy mediators concerning it have been baptism and faith, by
which thou wert called in Jesus Christ unto good works
;
to whom and to the Father and to the Holy Ghost belong
praise, honour and adoration, now and always and for ever
and ever. Amen.
II
ii Gratefulness on the part of the recipient spurs on the giver
to bestow gifts larger than before. He who embezzles petty
things is also false and fraudulent concerning things of im-
portance.
The sick one who is acquainted with his sickness is easily
to be cured and he who confesses his pain is near to health.
;
Many are the pains of the hard heart and when the sick
;
one resists the physician, his torments will be augmented.
There is no sin which cannot be pardoned except that one
which lacks repentance and there is no gift which is not
,
augmented save that which remains without acknowledgement.
For the portion of the fool is small in his eyes.
Think constantly of those who are superior to thee in ex-
cellence, so thou mayest see thyself at all times as being less
than they are. And be aware at all times of the heavy troubles
of those whose vexations are difficult and serious, so that thou
mayest become grateful for the small ones found with thyself
and thou mayest be able to bear them with joy.

8 SIX TRKATISKS ON THE ISKIIAVIOUR OF EXCELLENCE
When thou art in a state of subjection and languid and
dejected, and thou art hound and fettered before thy (oc in
mournful wretchedness and laborious service of sin, then recall
to thy mind the previous times of firmness how thou shewest
:
painstaking even concerning small things and how thou wert
moved with zeal against the obstructors in thy course how
:
12 thou utteredst sighs on account of the small things which were
despised by thee as accidental and thy whole person was winding
a wreath of victory over these things. Then, by these and
similar recollections, thy soul will be aroused as from the depth,
and be clad with the flame of zeal ; and it will rise from its
immersion as if from the dead, and stretch itself and return to
its former state, in hot strife against Satan and sin.
Recollect the fall of the strong, that thou mayest remain
humble under thy virtues. And think of the heavy sins of those
who fell and repented and of the praise and honour they
;
received afterwards, so that thou mayest acquire courage during
thy repentance.
Be a persecutor of thy self; then thy foe will be driven
away from thee.
He on peaceful terms with thy soul then heaven and earth
;
will be on peaceful terms with thee Be zealous to enter the
treasury within thee ; then thou wilt see that which is in heaven.
For the former and the latter are one, and entering thou wilt
see both. The ladder unto the Kingdom is hidden within thee
and within thy soul. Dive into thyself [freed] from sin there
;
thou wilt find steps along which thou canst ascend.
What the things of the world-to-be are, the scriptures do
not explain. Mow we may acquire the faculty to perceive their
delight even now, without change of nature or local transition,
they teach us plainly.
Though they call these things by beloved names of glorious
things which are delightful and esteemed by us, in order to
spur us on, still by saying that the eye has not seen, nor
i3 the ear heard ') and so on, they show us that the things-to-be
are not equal to any of the present things, by their being
incomprehensible. They have to be reckoned by us as giving
us even now spiritual delight, not the enjoyment ofthose things
in themselves, such as are found outside the being of the
i) I Cor. 2,9.

SIX TREATISES ON THE IJEHAVIOUR OE EXCELLENCE O.
receivers and promised us for the future state. Otherwise "The
Kingdom of God is within you" ') and "Thy Kingdom come"2 )
would teach us that we possess within us a pledge of the
delight which is in those things. For it is necessary that there
be a resemblance between these and the pledge, partial for
the present though it be, yet to be complete in the future.
Again the word "as through a glass' -3 shows us the compara-
)
bility anyhow, even if they are not one in essence. If now,
according to the trustworthy testimonies of the commentators
of the scriptures, this is due to an intelligible influenc — e of the
Holy Ghost, and is a part of that total one, then apart
from the spiritual influence that by intelligible apprehension
forms a communication between the Holy Ghost and those
—
who are influenced the delight of the saints in the world
is not occasioned by any sensible mediator, be it senses or
sense-organs, save only the wombs which contain all in defined
order, which we may call the profusion of light, though not
the intelligible profusion.
A friend of excellence is not he, who zealously practices
beautiful things, but who gladly accepts the evil things adhering
to him. Patiently to bear troubles for the sake of excellence,
is not so great as this that through the determination of the
good will, the mind be not confused by the allurements of
exciting things.
For repentance which conies after the taking away of freedom,
14 never can be a source of joy nor can it be reckoned as a
redemption of those who rue.
Protect the sinner without doing him wrong. But strengthen
his courage for life ; then the mercy of the Lord will bear thee l ).
Support with thy word the weak and the distressed in spirit
whenever thou canst then the hand that bears the universe
;
will support thee. Participate with those who are suffering in
heart, in passionate prayer and mourning of the heart then
;
before thy demand a fountain of grace will be opened.
lie strenuous in prayer at all time before God, with a heart
full of chaste deliberations mingled with passion; then He will
preserve thy mind from impure thoughts, so that the way of
God be not disordered in thee. Occupy thy gaze with constant
I) Luke 17,21. 2) Matth. 6,10. 3) 1 Cor. 13, 12.
4) An idea which recurs in the work. Cf. Epictcti D'nitril'M Lib. I. Cap. XVIII: on
ou SiH %xArxxrjli,i to7; ifixfTOfj-ijOK;.

IO SIX TIU';.\TISKS OX '['IIK IJKII.VVIOUK OK K\'('KKI.KM'K
intercourse with intelligent recitation [of the scriptures], lest, on
account of idleness, the sight of foreign things defile thy look.
Do
not tempt thy mind, for the sake of examination, by
consideration of impure seductive thoughts, thinking that thou
shalt not he vanquished, liven wise men have been perturbed
in this place and deviated. Do not take fire in thy bosom, as
hath been said '). Without severe bodily trouble, it is hard for
the untrained youth to be bound under the yoke of saintliness.
1he sign of the beginning of darkness of mind manifests
itself in the soul by dejection, in the first place with regard to
service and prayer. Kor it is not possible that the way in thy
soul towards error should be opened if thou hast — not fallen in
15 this point first. Then, being bereft of God's help which [else]
—
affords a way unto Him thou wilt easily fall into the hands
of the foes. And further, being without care for the matters
of excellence, thou wilt be carried towards the contrary things
in every manner. Departing, from any side, is the beginning
of approaching-] to the opposite one. Let the service of ex-
I
cellence be firm in thy soul ; meditate on it and so on.
Show thy weakness before God at all times, lest strangers
come to examine thy strength while thou art separated from
thy helper.
The service of the cross is a double one. And this is in
accordance with its twofold nature which is divided into two
parts: patience in face of bodily troubles, which is accomplished
through the instrumentality of the anger of the soul 3 ); this is
called 15 practice. And: the subtle intellectual service, in inter-
)
course with God, constant prayer and so on, which is performed
with the desiring part -) and called theory. The one purifies
the affectable part ~) by the strength of zeal ; the other clears
the intellectual part -) by the influence of the love of the soul,
which is the natural appetite.
Every one, who, before being trained in the former part,
passes to th — e latter, on account of — the pleasures it affords,
desiringly ') or rather negligently causes [God's] anger to
16 blow against him because, before having mortified his members
1) Prm'crbs (>,27.
2) Cf. The h'nol- of Clic /)o-\'. p. 524/5.
.s) The text has r<lXcA\'»3. i Ke;ul : r<iYoAv»3 .
4) We li.ive cither to cancel the uaw of OV»r^Lja.»«,i»0 or to suppose an anakoluth in
Isaac's construction; 1 have cancelled the wau'.

SIX TREATISES ON THE liEIIAVLOl'R Of EK<'Ef.EEXi E I I
on the earth 1), i.e. before healing- the illness of his delibera-
tions by endurance under the labours and the shame of the
cross, he has dared to occupy his mind with the glory of the
cross. This is what has been said by the ancient saints : If the
mind desires to ascend the cross before the senses have become
silent on account of weakness, the anger of God will strike it.
By the fact of the ascension of the cross causing anger he
does not point to the first part, namely, the bearing of troubles
patiently (which is the crucifying of the. body) but to the theo-
retical ascension which is the second part, and which is [truly]
subsequent to the healing of the soul. For he who hastens to
meditate with his heart vain imaginations concerning future;
things, while his mind is still stained by reprehensible passions,
will be reduced to silence on his way by punishment, be-
cause, before having purified his mind by means of the trials
met in subduing the carnal desires, on account of what he
has heard and read merely, he has hastened headlong to tread
—
a path full of darkness, being blind a way which exposes to
•
danger day and night even those whose sight is sound and
full of light, and who possess Grace as their guide, while
their eyes are full of tears, and with prayer and weeping they
convert night into day, on account of the danger of the course
and the hard rocks they meet, and the phantoms of sham
truth that are frequently found on the way among those who
pretend to be true. For divine things present themselves spon-
taneously, without thy perceiving them, if the place of the
heart be pure and undefiled.
If the small pupil of thy soul has not been purified, do not
i7
venture to look at the globe of the sun, lest thou be bereft
even of the usual sight, which is simple faith and humbleness
and confession of the heart and light service in accordance
with thy power : and thou be cast into one of the intelligible
),
places, which is the darkness without God, like him who vent-
ured to go to the meal in sordid habits :i).
1) Cf. <'olosMans 3,5.
2) Faith, confession and work are also the three elements which are enumerated as the
constituents of Islam. Cf. (jlia/.ah, Ihyii', I, 109.
3) This sentence occurs also, with slight variations, 011 p. 50 and 5-1 i»'l- In 'lie l'lsl
passage it shows its sententious character in an evident way. for here the contest is not
written in the 21"' person. Us sententious character appears also from the fact that itoccurs
three times in Isaac's book. Indeed it is not Isaac's spiritual property, but a popular
sentence in Hellenistic literature. Stobaeus ascribes it to KhcLjitius and gives it in the
following redaction : xz'ixz-ep di to roO v,?Jou $<dq obx tVn tjexrzT'lzi sirHevti xxi xSvjxrca rt-

I 2 SIX TRKAT1SKS ON THE lUatAVIOUR OF liXCKLl.KNCK
From labour and watchfulness springs purity of deliberations.
And from purity of deliberations inward light1 And from here
).
the mind is guided by Grace towards that which it is not al-
lowed to the senses either to teach or to learn.
Let excellence be reckoned by thee as the body, contem-
plation as the soul. The two [form] one complete spiritual man,
composed of sensible and intelligible parts. And as it is not
possible that the soul reach existence and birth without the
accomplished formation of the body, so it is not possible that
contemplation, the second soul, the spirit of revelations, be
formed in the womb of the intellect which receives the fulness
of spiritual seed, without the corporeal performance ofexcellence,
the dwellingplace of the knowledge which receives revelations.
Contemplation is the apprehension of the divine mysteries
which are hidden in the things spoken.
When
thou nearest of being far from the world, of leaving
the world, of being pure — from the world, thou art first in need
ts of learning and knowing not
—
after the fashion of a novice,
but with the impulses of gnosis what the term world means,
how many different meanings the word conveys. Then thou
wilt be able thyself to know, in how far thou art distant from
or connected with the world. If a man know not first what
the world is, he cannot understand with how many limbs he
is bound to or far from it.
There are many who think themselves wholly devoid of the
world in their behaviour because on two or three points they
refrain from it. [This is] because they have not understood nor
perceived with discernment that they are dead to the world in
one or two limbs, while others are living in the body of the
o-\i£t ovtoi xxi eri jj.xAAoj ryv xfrjietxv oiix. sttiv ISeiv xrie-ju xxi xSwjxtm rfi oixvoix. Hasilius
must also have been acquainted with it: in the collection of sentences by Antonius :iml
Maximus it occurs on his name in this form: elSsvxi b3>et'Ao;w x %p% ?^x?,el-j kxi x x?%
rriiii-rx-j. oh yxp txvtx wt'z ryq yAuTO-yji; r:t tou ieov, 'hx ftv) 6 vot/5 kjWtep h$f)Xk[j.oc, oAov to-j
'sihto/ liKwj x-zof3?J-zerj xTroKivy, i%il 4"^?- ''ut Nvc can even go back to 1'lotinus {EmuaJcs
I, 6 § 9): exv ii 'fy £t< ts}v irixj A^/zcSj v.xxtxic, km o'j xixx^xpi-ifjog vf x?$ivv\c, ivavepix , oh
'iv/XfJ.fJOC, TX TTX.lV >,X[JL~pX |3AS7T£f.*, oLSh ^Ah'Tf<, KX'J XKf.OC, $EIKVVYI KXfX'J TO OpxtyjXl Sw/ZfX&OV.
To yxp ipuv tj>6; to 6p<ti(ie-jov o-vyyiAt; xxi o\j.oio'j TroiyiTxi-tevov Js7 i-TtfixMetv tyi dtx. Ob yxp x-j
rrMTTOTS eiJf/ i^lxA/idi; :^Ktov iiKtQtt%i\$ (/.q yfyEvjj/zfvo? ob'le to xxAov xj '1S01 •i'vx*! 1**1 v.xAy
yijO[±t;vvf. I'e-jtriw ciy TrpuJrc-j isottoyc, t3? kxi y.xXbc, ttxc, ei ]ii?,Ka Oixtxt'jxi Qiov re xxi xxAbv.
Probably, however. ls:\ac did not borrow the sentence from any of these three authorities,
but from the works of Uionysius, where it occurs (Ecclvsiastim Hicrarchia, p. 75) in this
form : y.xi (j.01 [J.y4uc, xTeAea-TOq ixi Tij-s 4ex/ Utu kxi yxp OjSi Txl^ tiAiorevKratt; xhyx'ic, ev
xcrfa'/ETi xopxis xMTanru-j axi'vSuvov ov$i to~ic, inrlp v,\J.xc, hy%ape!-j xftt.xfitt;.
l) I.ittendly: the light of the r^Au^-i^ .

;
SIX TREATISES ON THE HEflAVrOUR OF KXCKLLKNCK I3
world. Therefore they even cannot perceive their affections and
because they do not perceive them they are not anxious to
be cured from them.
Theworld is said by speculative examination to be the extension
of a common name unto distinct affections. If we wish to call the
aftections by a common name we call them world; if we mention
the aftections separately, we call them by their separate names.
The affections are parts of the usual current of the world.
Where they have ceased, there the world 's current has ceased.
They are love of riches gathering of possessions fatness of
: ; ;
the body giving rise to the tendency towards carnal desire love
;
of honour which is the source of envy exercising government
19 pride and haughtiness of magistracy; folly; glory among men,
which is the cause of choler, bodily fear.
Where their current has been dammed, there the world,
after their example, has to some extent ceased to be main-
tained and to exist. In the same way as some of the saints,
who though being alive, yet are dead for they are alive bodily,
;
but they do not live carnally. See in which of those thou art
alive; then thou shalt know in how many parts thou art living
to the world and in how many thou art dead.
When thou hast learned what the world is, thou wilt be
instructed in these distinctions and also concerning thy being
bound to the world or thy being free from it.
In short : the world is bodily behaviour and carnal thoughts.
For the overcoming of the world is also to be recognised in
these two viz. from the change of behaviour and from the
:
alteration of the impulses.
From the impulses of thy mind to the things towards which
its impulses go astray, thou canst understand the measure of
thy behaviour viz. to which things thy nature turns without
:
labour; which are the constant inclinations and which are those
set into motion fortuitously ; whether the mind is the agent
for the apprehension of incorporeal impulses only, or whether
it works wholly through matter ; whether this materiality is an
affected state, or whether the impulses are but the stamps of
the mind's service to the body, so that the mind, not of its
own will, is hallucinating concerning those faculties by which
it performs virtues and from which, in a sound state, it derives
20 its motive for fervour and concentration of thought, so that
the mind can act corporeally, even with the loftiest aim, be-

I.| SIX TREATISES ON TIIK iiKIIAVIOUR OF KXCKFJ.F.NCK
cause of its lack of experience, even though it be in no affected
state ; and whether the mind is not distressed by the unseen
touch of the stamps of the imaginations, in view of its exces-
sive radiance in God, which is wont to cut offvain recollections.
The short descriptions of this chapter are sufficient for a
man's illumination if he be quiet and intelligent; and they
outweigh many books.
Bodily fear is strong in man, so strong that it often with-
holds him from praiseworthy and honourable things. But when
it is face to face with psychic fear it is absorbed by it as
coldness by the force of a flame.
Ill
The soul whose nature is not greatly solicitous for the ga-
thering of possessions, does not require great diligence in order
to find within itself impulses of wisdom unto God. For freedom
from connection with the world will naturally set in motion
flashes of intuition from which it can exalt itself unto God and
remain in ecstasy.
When the waters from without do not enter the fountain of
the soul, its natural waters will arise, viz. the wonderful intui-
tions which are moving towards God at all time.
21 As often as the soul is found not to be in this state, it has
either found a starting point in foreign recollections, or the
senses have caused it to be troubled by the touch of [outward]
things, when the senses are fenced in by solitude without a
break — and recollections have grown dim by its helpful influ-
ence then thou wilt see what the nature of the deliberations
of the soul, and what the nature of the soul is, and what
treasures are collected in it. These treasures arc incorporeal
intuitions which arise from the soul without care or labour
being spent on them. Nay, a man does not even know that
such deliberations could arise in human nature, nor does he
know who was his teacher, or how he has found that which
he cannot describe to his companion, or who has been his guide
towards that which he has not learned from another]
).
i) The passage reminds in a remarkable way of l'lotinus' description of the spontaneous
character of the illumination. Zellcr, Phil. J. Gricdwn*, 111, 2, p. 672 describes it thus:
ulinc Vermitthmg nnd Vorbereitung, durch cine [ilotzliche Erleuchtung geht es in der Seele
auf, sie kann nicht sagcu wohcr cs koinml, oh von innen odor von aussen, ja es kommt
streng genommen, gar niclit, sondern es ist uumittelbar da.

SIX TkKATISrCS OX TIIK lUCHAVlOC'R OK KX<'KI.LKNCK
I5
This is the nature of the soul. So the affections are addi-
tions, entering the soul on account of [certain) causes. But
naturally the soul is not affectablc ] ).
When
thou findest psychic or corporeal affections here or
there in the scriptures, such things are said concerning those
causes. But the soul naturally has no affections.
But the philosophers who are without do not believe this
;
neither do those who are their followers. But we believe that
God has not made His image affectable. With I lis image I do
2 not mean the body but the soul which is invisible '). Every
image is a copy in which the prototype is depicted. And a
visible image cannot be the copy of something invisible. So we
believe that the affections of the soul are not natural as they
say. If any one likes to dispute concerning this point we will
ask him: What is natural to the soul? To be without affec-
tions, full of light, or moved by the affections and dark? Now
if the nature of the soul is to be clear and a receptacle of
the blessed light, it will be found in this condition when it
returns unto its original state. But when it is moved by the
affections, all the members of the church confess it to have
abandoned its nature. Consequently the affections are later ac-
cessions to the nature of the soul. And it is not at all becoming
to think the affections to be psychic. If the soul be moved by
them, nevertheless it is clear that it is moved by something
outside it, not by what is its own. And if these [affections| are
thought to be natural, because the soul is moved by them
through the intermediary cause of the body, then hunger, thirst
and sleep would also be natural to the soul because it is
affected and brought to rest by them along with the body. And
this would also be true for the amputation of limbs, fever,
pains, illnesses and so on, by which the body is affected be-
cause of its connection with the soul and the soul because of
its connection with the body, being affected with joy because
of bodily experiences, and receiving distress, along with the
torments of the body.
What is natural to the soul; what is oxtern a 1
to and what is above: its n a ture ').
Natural to the soul is the understanding of all created things,
1) <'f. Introduction.
2) This terminology occurs in Sloic writings. CI. /cllcr. I' Inlosophie </,-/ Giia!n->i\ III,
I, l>. 264.

l6 SIX TKKATISKS ON Till-: UKIIAVlOUtf OK EXCKl.LKN*'K.
sensible and intelligible. Above its nature its being- moved by
divine contemplation ; external to its nature its being excited
emotionally by the affections. Also the light of the world, the
victorious Basilius, says thus: when the soul is in its natural
order, it is found above ; When it has abandoned its nature, it is
found beneath and on the earth. There are no affections above,
where also the place of the soul is said to be. But when its
nature abandons its order, it becomes affectable. Where then
are the affections of the soul, now that it appears that they
do not belong to its nature?
It is clear that tbe soul is moved by the reprehensible affec-
tions which are in the body, as also it is moved by hunger
and thirst on account of the body. But because there are no
laws concerning these, the soul is not reprehensible on account
of them. Just as, sometimes, a man is ordered by God to do
those things which are blameworthy and he receives, instead
of blame and reprehension, good reward, as Hosea the prophet
who contracted an unlawful marriage and as Elijah who com-
mitted slaughter in his zeal for God and as those, who on
Moses' order, stabbed with swords their kindred.
But it is said that, apart from what belongs to the nature
of -the body, the soul has also that which belongs to its nature,
viz. anger and choler ; and these are its passions.
Second question. We ask: when the desire of the soul
is kindled to a flame by divine things, does this belong to its
h nature, or rather when it is set upon earthly and bodily things?
And when it is said that the nature of the soul is on fire for
the sake of those things which excite its zeal, is then this
passion natural when it goes hand in hand with bodily desire,
envy, glory and so on, or when it goes in the direction oppo-
We
site to them ? shall answer the disputed question and we
too shall enquire into it.
The holy writ says many things allegorically l ) ; and often it
uses metaphorical ") terms. Many times it applies to the soul
that which belongs to the body and to the body that which
belongs to the soul without distinguishing between the two,
for the sake of succinctness. Now the intelligent understand
what they read, viz. the aim of scripture. In the things related
to the divinity of our Lord for instance, in a high and elevated
i) "p^Jsn <&\CV°A:i 2) r^X'irtx.

six TkK.vnsFS ox Tin; ukiiavioi'r or kxcku-knck ij
way, applies to Ilis humanity, that which docs not suit human
nature and to His divinity what does not suit it. And many
who do not understand the aim of the language of scripture
—
have stumbled here so that they never could rise again. So
it is also with the things which concern soul and bod)-.
If excellence is the natural health of the soul, the affections
however ailments accustomed to oppress it and to bereave it
of its health, it is clear that health is prior in nature to acci-
dental illnesses. And if this be so (as it is indeed true) then
excellence necessarily must be natural to the soul and the
accidental external to its nature. For it is not possible that
what is prior should not be natural.
25 Third question. The affections of the body are they
naturally inherent in it or of a secunclary nature' And those
which affect the soul, by the intermediary of the body, are they
secondary or natural? To call— those of the body not natural,
is impossible. As to the soul because it is known — and uni-
versally confessed that purity belongs to its nature no one
will venture in view of this fact to maintain that it is primarily
affectable; for it is generally conceded that ailment is secon-
dary to health and it is not possible that one and the same
things should be a good and an evil nature. One of the two,
in any case, must be the prior of the other; and that which
is the older one, is also the natural. Whatever is accidental,
cannot be said to be natural and essential; but it is an irrup-
tion from without. And all accident and obtrusion is connected,
whenever it be, with variation and change. Nature, however,
does not change or vary.
All ] existing affections are given to be a help to each of
)
the natures to which they naturally belong and for the growth
of which they were given by God. The bodily affections are
placed by God in the body for the sake of profit and growth
of the body, and the psychic affections, i. e. the psychic powers,
for the sake of the growth and profit of the soul. And when the
body is compelled to desist from its affectable nature, by with-
drawing from the affections, and to follow the nature of the
soul, it is injured. And when the soul leaves its own nature
and follows that of the body, it is injured. Because, according
to the word of the Apostle, the spirit desires that which harms
l) Cf. Introduction
Verli. Af.l. I.etUrk. uyri I Won

I
8 SIX TREATISKS OX TllK liF.llAVKU'ROF K\<'liU-I'lNCH
26 the body and the body desires that which harms the spirit
').
And these two are naturally opposites to one another. There-
fore no one shall abuse (rod because lie has implanted in
our nature affections and sins. For, when He set in order each
nature, He implanted in it that which gives it growth. But if
one. connects itself with the other, it is no longer in its own
domain, but in a foreign one.
If these affections naturally belonged to the soul, why then
should the soul be injured when using them? For that which
is the property of nature, does not injure it. And how is it,
that the accomplishment of the bodily affections is profitable
and helpful to the body, whereas those of the soul injure
the soul, if they belong to it? And why should, if this be true,
excellence torment the body, but be beneficial unto the soul5
Thou seest how what is external to their nature injures every-
one of these natures. For every one of these natures exults
when it is near to what is its own If thou art desirous to
know what are the properties of every one of these natures,
thou must observe that its properties are those things by the
use of which it profits. And if it is tormented by [the use of]
any of these things, then know that it is influenced by what
is not its property. We conclude: If it is known, that the
affections of every one of these natures are each other's op-
posites, then, consequently, all that gives profit and rest to the
body when used by the soul has not to be reckoned as be-
longing to the soul. Because what is natural to the soul is
fatal to the body, except those things which are connected
with the soul in some secondary way. Because of the wcak-
27 ness of the flesh the soul can absolutely not be freed from
them, as long as it is clad with the flesh. For its nature is
connected with the troubles of the flesh because of the union
of its impulses with the carnal senses, with which they are
interwoven by the inscrutable wisdom. And, though intermingled
in this way, nevertheless impulses are distinguished from im-
pulses, and will from will, viz. the carnal from the spiritual
one. And nature is not at all composite nor does it disavow
what is its property. And though man renders the impulses in
a high degree equal to each other, by sin or by excellence, at
certain times every one exerts its will and shows its power.
l) ('('. CahUiiins 5, 17.

SIX TKi:.\lISKS ON T1IK BKIIAVK)UR OK KXClU.r.KXiT. 1Q
But when bodily thoughts have to some extent been lifted
up, then their impulses manifest themselves wholly in the spi-
ritual sphere, swimming- in the heart of heaven with incom-
prehensiblc things. But even then the body cannot remain
without some memory of what its own is, even as, when the
impulses are in the domain of sin, the beautiful emotions of
the soul are not brought to silence in the mind.
What is purity of mind? Not that one who does not
—
know evil things, is pure of mind that were to be a brute. Nor
do we call pure of mind those whom nature has placed in the
age of boyhood that were to postulate that man should not
;
belong to the class of created beings. But purity of mind con-
sists in being captivated by divine things, [a state] that is only
reached when many virtues have been practised.
We
do not venture to say that he that has reached it, has
acquired it without the experience of contrary deliberations.
Else he would not be clad with a body. For we do not think
28 that before the world-to-be nature can be purged from contrary
[inclinations]. The temptation of the deliberations is not, in my
opinion this, that one surrenders to them, but the beginning
of the struggle within the deliberations which begins in the
mind on account of the four kinds of bases which are the root
of movement to all kinds of affections. So that in this life
there is not found anyone exalted above earthly recollections,
even if he belong to the masters of the battle and, like l'aul,
be reputed perfect.
But while the body by means of its impulses, in accordance
with the order of nature, and the world by its natures through
the intermediation of the senses, and the soul by deliberations,
recollections and powers of deviation, and the demons by the
—
co-operating forces of the things mentioned while1 the power
)
of these fourfold affections is experienced by him"), he will be
troubled to a small degree onlya and be drawn towards the
)
excellent things which are seen by intuition. Decide thou,
whether it is possible that one of these four be annihilated
before the annihilation of the world, or by the transition that
takes places at death or whether the bod)- can elevate itself
;
wholly above its needs, without nature's urging it to seek any
1) 1 have retained ihc .inakoluthic character of the original.
2) The mystic.
3) Other Mss: he will perceive this to a small extent only.

2o s i \ •ii<i:A'nsi;s <>x ' i 111•: i;kiia\ tot k ok k.wki.lknvk
of the worldly things. If now this is deemed absurd, so long
as these [tour powersj exist, it is necessary that also the affec-
tions move themselves in all beings clad wilh a body, and
consequently caution must be practised by ever)' one. By the
affections I do not understand one or two, but all the different
(Mies which [occur inj those clad with flesh. lUit if a man should
29 venture jto say that he experiences only) weak impulses and
harmless strife, we would say that, whoever such people may
be, they do not require works but great watchfulness.
What is the d tffere nce bet \veen p urity of m i nd l )
and purity o f heart.
Purity of mind is something" other than purity of heart, just
as there is a difference between one of the members of the
whole body and the whole body. The mind is one of the senses
of the soul. The heart is the central organ") of the inward
senses-, this means the sense of senses, because it is the root:! ).
And if the root is holy, so also are all the branches. But this
is not so if it is holy in one of the branches only. Now with
but little acquaintance with the scriptures and a little exercise
in fasting and solitude, the mind forgets its former occupation
and is cleansed, while it refrains from foreign habits. But is
also easily defiled.
The heart is purified through great trouble and by being-
deprived of all association with the world, together with a
complete mortification in every point. And when it has been
purified, its purity is not defiled by the touch of insignificant
[worldly) things-, this means: it has no fear even before severe
struggles. For it possesses a sound stomach that easily digests
all sorts of food which are difficult for others who are sick in
their interior. For the physicians say: All meat which is difficult
of digestion, increases the forces of the sound body, because it
is taken up by a strong stomach. In the same way every
30 purification that is brought about easily, in a short time and
by small labours, is easily defiled again, But the purity that
is acquired through great troubles and after a long time by the
highest part of the soul, is not endangered by insignificant
touches of the [worldly} things.
Ouiet senses give birth to peace in the soul, because they
do not allow it to experience strife. But since the soul has no
I) rdlo-iw-i 2) .tiwrtf' 3) Cf. Introduction.

SIX TRKATISKK ON T1IK I'.KlfAVIOUK OK KXCKLLKNCr; 2 1
sensation of any thing, it is a victory without struggle. But
when it becomes negligent, it is not able to remain steadfast,
and when it strives to ged rid of apprehension after the latter
has got accession, the soul destroys its previous properties, viz.
serenity and natural perfection. For the majority of men, and
possibly the whole world, leave their first state on account of
this cause '). Only one out of many returns to his first place
when he has once adopted the second habit. Much better is
simplicity than the different kinds of forgiveness.
Human
nature needs fear in order to euard against the
borders of the commandments being crossed, [it needs] love to
excite the desire of good things, for the sake of which man
hastens to perform beautiful things.
Spiritual knowledge is posterior to the performance of ex-
cellence. Prior to both are love and fear. And fear is prior to
love. Every one who ventures to acquire the latter things
before the former, undoubtedly lays a perishable foundation in
his soul. For they are placed by God in such an order, that
these proceed from those. Do not interchange the love of thy
neighbour with the love of [worldly] things, for that which is
precious above all things, is hidden in it.
A
[ material object which is a mark for the eyes of the flesh,
is also' of such a nature as to affect the hidden visual powers
;
and the affections which cloud the second natural contempla-
tion, acts in the same manner for the natural steadfastness.
They are related to one another in the same way, up to where
ceases the current of all kinds of contemplation. When the
mind 2 ) is in a state of natural steadfastness, it is in angelic
contemplation , which is the first and natural contemplation
which is also named naked mind. When the mind is in the second
state of natural knowledge, it sucks and is sustained by the
milk from the corporeal breasts ; this state is called the last
garment of the afore-mentioned state-, it is placed after [the
state of] purity, which the mind enters first. It is prior in
being, for it is the first stage of knowledge, although posterior
in honour. On this account, therefore, it is also called the
second one, as also on account of the indications of some of
the tokens by which the mind is purified and trained for the
ascent to a second order, which is the perfection of the intel-
i) Negligence. 2) nillOCO

12 SIX TkKAllSKS OX l'HK UKI AVJ.OUK. OF KXCKLPKNCK
I
lectual impulses, and the stage which is near divine contem-
plation l
).
The last garment of the mind are the senses. Its state of
nakedness is its being moved by kinds of non-material con-
templation. Leave the small things in order to find the ho-
noured ones.
Be dead in life, then thou wilt not live in death. Let thyself
die in integrity, but not live in guiltiness-). Not only those who
suffer death for the sake of the faith in Christ are martyrs, but
also those who die for the sake of keeping his commandments.
Be not inept in thy petitions, lest thou grieve God by thy
ignorance.
Learn to pray with prudence, that thou mayest be esteemed
worthy of glorious things.
Seek well-esteemed things from Him, who does not withhold;
then thou wilt receive honour from Him, because of the choice
of thy wise will.
Solomon sought wisdom and he received, apart from it, the
earthly kingdom, because he knew how to ask wisely viz. great
things from the King.
hlisha sought one or two parts of the spirit that was upon
his master and his request was not withheld from him.
The honour of the King is lessened by him who seeks con
temptible things.
Israel sought despicable things ; it gained the anger of God.
It neglected to wonder at the workings and terrible effects of
His deeds and it sought the desires of its belly. And while
their food was still in their mouth, the anger of God reached
them. Present thy requests unto God in accordance with His
glorious being, in order that thy honour be great in His eyes
and He rejoice in thee.
When a man seeks from a king a measure full of dung he
will not only be despised on account of his despicable request,
i) The above passage betrays its relation with Philonean thought at once by the term
"naked mind" which often occurs in I'hilo (I 76 s<[., 98, 179, 270). There is further con-
cordance, but also difference between the two authors. Both of them distinguishes three
kinds of nakedness. According to Isaac, they are: the puerile state, the state of natural
purity, and the purified state. According to I'hilo (d 76 scj.) they are: the puerile slate;
the state of Noah's drunkenness in which the sold has lost its faculties: the state of purity
in which the soul has abandoned all earthly things.
2) (.'(. Porphyrins ^ , Scjih'/itine, IX: youv ^x-jxraq hi-xhoic,' 6 jxh a-vveyvwri-tevot Xvofiivou
tov iTM/xXTCg xto ^\j c,' 6 li tS-j (\,iho?6^(a-j, ?.vOjj.fjy$ r^q ^"JC?? xrrd tou crainxrot;. And the
Pythagorean sentence in Stobaeus (p. 158): reivxvxi ttoMm Kpetrrov >i Si zxpxrt'x-j tijv ^ti^ijv
XfJ.XUfS'TXI.

SIX TREATISKS OX THE BKUAVIOUK OF KXCKIJ-KN'CK 23
exposing thus his ignorance, but he also insults the king by
his insipid demand : such also is he who in prayer asks cor-
poreal things from God.
Lo, the angels and the archangels which are the chiefs of
the angels look at thee in the time of prayer, [in order to know)
which prayer thou wilt present unto their Lord. And they wonder
at thee when they see the corporeal one leaving his dunghill
and asking heavenly things.
33 Do not seek from (rod that which Me is anxious to give us
even l[ we do not beg for it, which He withholds not from
his housemates and not even from those who are wholly foreign
to the knowledge of Him, nay who do not even know that He is.
Use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do l ). What is this
"as the heathen"? The corporeal things are sought by the peo-
ples of the earth but give ye no thought saying what shall
;
we eat, or what shall we drink or wherewithal! shall we be
clothed? For your Father knoweth that ye also have need of
all these things-).
A son does not ask bread from his father, but makes sup-
plication concerning the great portions in .store for him in the
house of his father. That which our Lord has commanded
concerning daily bread, namely that we pray for it, is a peti-
tion which he handed down to the common people, because
of the weakness of their minds. Regard that which he com-
mands to those who are perfect in knowledge and sound of
soul, viz. ye shall not take thought of food or raiment. If
:
your Father bestows care upon the fowls that have no soul,
how much more upon you. lkit ask from God the Kingdom
and righteousness, then he will add these things too.
If He is slow in granting thy request, when thou askest
without receiving promptly, then be not distressed. For thou
art not wiser than God. When thou remainest as thou art :v
),
[it isj cither because thy behaviour does not agree with thy
request or because the ways of thy heart diverge from the
;
aim of thy prayer; or because thy inner state is childish in
comparison with the greatness of the thing.
It is not becoming that great things should fall into our
34 hands easily; lest the gift of God should be thought to be
mean because of its being acquired without difficulty.
I) Matthew 6,7. 2) Matthew 6,31 s<[. 3) The pi.iyer not being heard.

24 ^l ^ TKKATISKS ON Till''. HKlLVVtOULi OF I'A'CKr.LKXCF.
All that is acquired with labour, is guarded with caution.
Thirst after Jesus then he will satisfy thee with his love.
;
Shut thy eyes to the precious things of the world then thou
•,
wilt be deemed worthy of a peace given by God to reign in
thy heart.
Restrain thyself from the allurements that arc shining for the
eyes then thou wilt be deemed worthy of spiritual joy.
;
If thy behaviour is not worthy of God, do not ask from Him
praised things, lest thou appear as a man who tries God.
Prayer accords strictly with behaviour.
No man desires heavenly things as long as he is bound
with ties [impeding] his will, on account of the body. And no
man asks divine things while he is occupied with earthly things.
The desire of every man is known from his works; and that
which he cares for, he will be anxious to seek in prayer. And
he will be zealous in showing by his outward deeds that which
he asks for in his prayer.
He who desires great things, has no intercourse with mean ones.
Be free even while thou art bound in the body and show
submission in thy freedom for the sake of Christ and be wise
;
in thy innocence, lest thou be beguiled.
Love humility in thy dealings, that thou mayest be freed
from the imperceivable snares which are continually to be found
by the side of the paths on which the humble walk.
Do not reject the troubles, by means of which thou art led
towards knowledge.
Do not fear temptations by means of which thou wilt find
precious things.
Fray that thou mayest not be led into temptations of the
soul. To those of the body thou shalt prepare thyself with all
thy force and with all thy limbs thou shalt swim in them. For
without them it is impossible for thee to approach unto God.
For beyond them lies divine rest.
Who
flees from temptations, ilees from excellence; not from
the temptations of desires, but from [those of] troubles.
How
does the sentence "pray, that ye enter not into temp-
tation" ') concord with "strive to enter in at the strait gate" ~)
and "fear not them which kill the body" :! ) and "he that loseth
his life for my sake shall find it"? 1
)
i) Matthew 26,41. 2) I.tike 13,24. 3) Matthew 10,28. 4) Matthew 10,39.

SIX TKHATISKS ON TI1K P.KHAYLOUR OK KX('I'LLKM 'I-: 2$
111 all these places our Lord recommends to us temptations;
but in that he orders us to pray that we enter not into temp-
tation. What kind of excellence can be accomplished without
temptations? Or what kind of temptation is stronger than the
which he orders us to undergo for His sake? And "he that
taketh not his cross and followeth after me, is not worthy of
me" l ). "Pray that ye enter not into temptation", but entering into
temptations occurs everywhere in his teachings. And he has
said: without temptations the Kingdom of heaven is not found.
O how strait is the way of thy teachings, our Lord! And
he who does not discriminate with knowledge, as he reads,
will always remain without it, as far as his insight is concerned.
When the sons of Zebedee and their mother desired of him
to sit with him in the Kingdom, he postulated this: Are ye
able to suffer gladly the cup of temptations? Are ye able to
36 drink of the cup that I shall drink of and to be baptized with
the baptism that I am baptized with-)? And how orderest Thou
O
here, our Lord: pray that ye enter not?
Which are the temptations into wh ich we shall
pray not to enter.
Pray that thou enterest not into temptation concerning thy
belief.
Pray that thou enterest not into temptation through mental
presumtion, with the demon of abuse and haughtiness.
Pray that thou enterest not, under [God's] admission, into
the manifest temptations of the senses, which Satan is able to
instill unto thee with God's permission, on account of the
foolish thoughts thou hast cherished.
Pray that the witness of chastity be not taken away from
thee lest thou be tempted in the flames of sin without him.
Pray that thou enterest not into the temptation of abusing
anything.
Pray therefore, that thou enterest not into psychic temp-
tations, namely those which lead the soul into struggle, doubt
and allurements. Put prepare for the bodily ones with thy
whole: body and swim in them with all thy limbs, thy eyes full
of tears, that thou be found amidst of them with thy guar-
dian, lor without temptations CtocI's care cannot be perceived
and familiarity of speech with Him cannot be acquired and
1) Matthew 10,3s. 2) MaUhew 20,22.

26 SIX TRKATISKS ON TIIK HKHAYIOUR OT KXCKLLKNCK
spiritual wisdom cannot be learnt and the love of God cannot
be implanted in the soul.
Before [having experienced] temptations, man prays unto God
as a stranger. But when he has entered into troubles for the
sake of his love, without being changed, then, as one that has
laid upon God [the obligation of paying] a certain loan, he is
reckoned as His housemate and His friend, who has fought,
for the sake of His will, against the host of His enemies. This
37 is [the meaning of) Pray that ye enter not into temptation.
:
And further: pray that thou enterest not into temptations
for the sake of thy self-exaltation, but for the sake of thy love
of God, that His power may be conspicuous in thee. Pray that
thou enterest not into such on account of the folly of thy
thoughts and deeds, but in order that thou provest to be a
friend of God and His power be glorified in thy endurance.
On the mercy of our Lord in this matter, who
m e as ures h is wo rd in acco rdance w i t h human
w ea knes s.
Further he deals [with us] in this matter compassionately. II
thou considerest bodily things [it appears that God], also in this
point has remembered the weakness of nature it was possible
;
that, on account of the wretchedness of the body, we should
not find fortitude against the power of the temptations when-
ever it should present itself, and consequently we should even
leave [the path of] truth, being overcome by troubles. There-
fore he orders us that, as much as possible, we should avoid
entering wilfully into temptation. And not only this, but [he
even says] : Pray that you be not found in it without just cause,
if it be possible to please God without temptation.
But if very great excellence is desired, when temptations as-
sail and that most terribly, and if that excellence cannot be
accomplished without a man's bearing them, in that case it is
not becoming to spare ourselves or anyone. Even on account
of fear thou shalt not shrink from that great thing upon which
the life of thy soul depends, putting forward as an apology
38 for thy laxness Pray that ye enter not into temptation. For
:
such are those, concerning whom it is said that they sin secretly
by [fulfilling] the commandments.
If one of the divine commandments comes to be dissociated
from a man, be it the state of chastity, or the habit of holiness,
or the confession of faith, or the testimony concerning the word

SIX TRKATISKS OX TIIK liKlIAVTOl'k OK KX</KLLKN<'K 2"
of God, or the cautiously guarding of the other prescriptions
—
of the Law it is impossible that he should not fall if he be
afraid of temptations. Therefore he has to despise the body
with complete confidence, and to entrust God with its soul and
to proceed in the name of the Lord. And He that was with
Joseph in the land of Lgypt and who was the witness of his
chastity, and who was with Daniel in the pit of lions, and
with Hananja and his companions in the furnace, and with
Jeremia in the pit of mire and who saved him and made him
an object of compassion in the midst of the cam]) of the Chal-
daeans ; who was with Peter in the prison and brought him
out of it through shut gates; and with Paul in the synagogues
of the Jews; in short, He who in all generations was with His
servants always and everywhere and showed in them His
power and made them victorious and guarded them miracu-
lously so that they saw His salvation manifestly at the time
of their troubles, He will strenothen and yfuard him in the
midst of the storms which surround him. Therefore he shall
arm himself against the invisible foe and his hosts with the
zeal of the Maccabees and of the other holy prophets, apostles,
martyrs, confessors and recluses who have maintained the divine
laws and the spiritual commandments in frightful places and
39 among difficult and fearful temptations and who have thrown
the world and the body behind them and clung to the truth in
them without giving way to the constraint pressing both body
and soul and endured as heroes; in short, whose names are
written in the book of life until the coming of our Lord. And
their deeds are preserved in the book by God's decree for
our instruction and encouragement according to the testimony
of the blessed Apostle, so that we may get insight from them
and learn the way of God, placing their stories before our
mental eyes as living images, that we may resemble them and
conform the ways of our behaviour unto theirs, after the pattern
of the Ancients.
Io the soul endowed with mind the words of God are
delightful as oily food which makes fat the body, to the palate
of those who are healthy.
The stories of the just are as desirable to the ear of the
perfect, as a constant watering to young plantations.
Listening to God's providential leading of the Ancients be
estimated by thee as precious drugs for weak eyes. And let

28 SIX TRKATISKS ON TI1K 131'T1AVIOUR OF EXCh'XLKXCK
the recollection of it be kept with thee at all times of the clay.
Meditate and think of it and learn wisdom from it, that thou
be able to receive in thy soul with honour the recollection of
God's greatness and find for thyself everlasting- life in Jesus
Christ, the mediator of God and mankind, who was one in his
two natures. Though the legions of the angels are not able
to look upon the glory surrounding His majestic throne, yet
for thy sake Me has appeared before the world the most con-
temptible and humble of man; without form or comeliness;
40 and while Ilis invisible nature was not within the reach of the
apprehension of created beings, He accomplished His provi-
dential dealings by [covering Himself) with a veil [made of the
stuff] of our limbs, in order to save the life of all.
This is he through whom He has purified many peoples ]
)
and on whom the Lord has laid the sin of us all -), as Jesaja
says. It pleased the Lord to humble him and to put him to
griefx
).
Sin has been placed in him who knew no sin [). To whom,
for his providential dealings in all generations for our sake, be
glory and praise and thanksgiving and adoration from all, now
and at all time and for ever and ever. Amen.
IV
The soul that loves God [finds] its rest in God only.
First detach from thyself the outward bonds, then strive to
bind thy heart to God.
To be detached from matter is prior to being bound to God 3 ).
When a child has been weaned, bread is given him as food.
And a man who wishes to become excellent in God, has first
to wean himself from the world, as a child is weaned from
his mother's breasts.
Bodily labours are prior to psychic service, as the creation
of the body takes place before that of the soul.
For he who does not perform bodily labour, does not per-
41 form psychic labours either. For the latter are born out of the
former as the ears from mere grains. And he who does not
perform psychic service, is also devoid of spiritual gifts.
1) Jesaja 52,15 in the l'eshho. 2) Jes. 53,6. 3) Jcs. 53,10.
4) 2 Cor. 5,21. 5) The sentence occurs also p. 7. Cf. Introduction.

SIX TRKATISIvS ON THE IJKIIAVIOl'R OK F.XOKLLKN* K 2U
Femporary suffering for the sake of the truth is not to be
compared with the delight preserved for those who perform
labours of excellence.
As the weeping of the time of sowing is followed by the
joys of harvest J ), so are the labours for the sake of God
followed by joy.
Ihe bread earned with sweat, delights the workman; labours
for the sake of righteousness, the heart that has received the
knowledge of Christ.
Suffer contempt and -) humiliation in the thought of excel-
lence, for the: sake of the heart's familiarity of speech with
God. Kvcry time a man suffers a hard word with discernment,
save only when it is caused by his own fault, he receives a
crown of thorns on his head for the sake of Christ ; blessed is
he! At other times he is crowned and knows it not.
He who flees from the fame [that rests] on knowledge, will
perceive in himself the hope of the world to come.
He who promises to leave the world, yet quarrels with men
concerning [worldly! things because he is not willing to give
up anything of what is agreeable unto him, he is perfectly
blind, because he has given up the whole world voluntarily,
yet quarrels about a part of it.
If anyone flees from what is agreeable [unto him| in this
world, his mind will behold the world to come.
He who is master of possessions, is the slave of passions.
Do not estimate gold and silver only as possessions, but all
things thou possessest for the sake of the desire of thy will.
He who cuts off impediments from fear of affections, he is
a wise man indeed.
Without the constant service of excellence true knowledge
42 cannot be found.
Not by bodily works alone is the knowledge of life acquired,
but by directing our efforts to the cutting off of mental af-
fections.
He who labours without discernment will easily become the
victim ofthe causes of sin when they present themselves to him.
Never praise him who labours with his body, but concerning
his senses is lax and without constraint, viz. whose ears and
mouth are open and whose eyes are prone to wander.
1) I.ittcrally: full hands. Cf. l's. 126,6. 2) Reading of London Ms. 14632.

30 srx iri:arisi.s ox tiik bkhaykxjk ok kxcku.kni'k
If thou settest up as thy aim to practice merry, train thy-
self not to pursue justice in other fields, lest thou appear to
work with one hand and to spill with the other. For there
clemency is necessary, but here magnanimity.
Let the forgiveness of those who are guilty towards thee
in these things, be reckoned by thee as a work of righteous-
ness. Then thou wilt see peace springing up in thy soul from
both sides, that is when thy path is superior to dignity
and justice, and thou wilt favour the rise of freedom in all
things. l;or one of the saints, speaking of these things, says:
The merciful, if he be not just, is blind, in so far as he pro-
vides others from wealth which has been gathered with justice
and by his own labours, and not from the acquirements of
falsehood, oppression, iniquity and cunning.
In the same way, in another place, this man preaches If
:
thou sowest among the poor, sow from thy own possessions;
what thou sowest from those of others is much more bitter
43 than weeds. But I say : if the merciful be not even above
justice, he is not merciful. This means, that he will not only
show mercy unto men on his own part, but that he will volun-
tarily suffer iniquity with delight, so that he does not maintain
and postulate full justice in his dealings with his fellow men,
but is merciful towards him and surpassing justice by mercy,
wreathing for himself the crown not of the just under the law,
but of the perfect under the new covenant.
To g"ive the poor from one's own possessions, and to cover
the naked on seeing them, to love the neighbour as one self,
not to do iniquity or falsehood, are things commanded also by
the old law. But perfection in behaviour, according to the new
covenant, commands thus: If a man takes from thee, do not
demand back give every one who asks from thee. And not
;
only hast thou to suffer gladly iniquitous dealing in possessions
and other outward things, but thou hast even to give thyself
in behalf of thy neighbour.
Merciful is he, who shows his compassion cowards his neigh-
bour not only in gifts, but who after hearing or seeing any-
thing" that causes suffering to any one, cannot withhold his
heart from burning; who, even if he receives a blow on his
cheek from his brother, does not venture to repay him even
with a word and so cause him to sutfer intellectually.
Honour the works of vigils, then thou wilt find consolation

SIX TKKATISKS ON 'I'lll-; IJKIIAVIOl'R OF KXCKU.KXVK 3 I
near in thy self. Be constantly occupied with recitation in soli-
tude, then thou wilt be drawn towards ecstasy at all times.
44 Love poverty with endurance, that thy mind may be con-
centrated and so not wander.
Hate abundance, that thou be preserved against confusion
of mind.
Cut off intercourse with] the multitude and take care of thy
j
behaviour that thy soul be saved from spilling its inward rest.
Love chastity lest thou be put to shame at the time of
prayer before Him who exposes thee to strife.
Acquire a pure behaviour, that thy soul may exult during
prayer and joy be kindled in thy mind at the recollection of
death.
Keep control of small things, lest thou neglect great ones.
Be not lazy with regard to labours lest thou be put to shame
when in presence of all comrades.
Pursue thy work with knowledge, lest it throw thee out of
thy whole course.
Be not destitute of provisions lest [thy companions] leave
;
thee alone in the midst of the way and depart.
Acquire freedom in thy behaviour, that thou be freed from
confusion.
Do not use thy freedom for the sake of comfort, lest thou
become a slave of slaves.
Love abstinence in thy behaviour, that the deliberations
leading to haughtiness of heart and lasciviousness may be
restrained.
That he who loves finery should acquire a humble mind, is
not possible. Lor the heart within and the habits without
necessarily must be parallel one to another. Who would be
able to acquire chastity of mind, when he is addicted to luxu-
riance3 And who could acquire humble inward deliberations,
when he is pursuing outward glory? And who is he, that being
lascivious without and lax in his limbs, should be chaste in his
45 heart and pious in his deliberations? When the mind is guided
by the senses, it feeds with them upon the food of the beasts;
but when the senses are guided by the mind, they feed with
it upon the sustenance of the angels.
Vain glory is a servant to fornication. If it is concerned with
behaviour, to haughtiness. To humility brevity is proper.
Love of glory is connected with prolixity. The former through

32 SIX TREATISKS ON Till'. r.EIIAYIOUR OF EXCELLENCE
constant concentration, attains to contemplation and arms the
soul unto chastity. The latter through the continual wandering
of the mind, gathers provisions1 through contact with [outward]
)
things, and denies the heart.
It touches lasciviously upon the nature of things and excites
the mind through lascivious deliberations. The former is spiri-
tually concentrated by contemplation and moves its possessors
towards glory.
Compare not all powers and signs that are worked in the
whole world, with a man's consciously sitting in solitude.
Love the ease of solitude rather than satisfying the hunger
of the world and the converting of the multitude of heathen
peoples from error unto adoring God. Let it be more excel-
lent in thy eyes to detach thyself from the bonds of sin, than
to detach the subdued unto liberty from those who subject
their bodies.
Prefer to make peace with thyself, in harmony with the
trinity within thee: body, soul and spirit, rather than to ap-
pease those who are angry at thy teachings.
Love simplicity of speech together with experienced know-
46 ledge within, rather than the production of a Gihon ofteachings
by acuteness of mind and out of a deposit of hear-say and ink.
Be anxious to quicken the deadness of thy soul caused by
affections, unto the emotion of the impulses in God, rather
than to quicken those who are dead in the natural sense.
There have been many people who have exercised powers,
quickened the dead, bestowed their labour upon the erring,
done great signs and drawn many people towards God by-
exciting their admiration of the things done by them but
;
afterwards those who have saved others, have fallen into im-
pure and disreputable passions. And after they had given life
to others, they have brought themselves to death and caused
themselves to stumble by the offence given by their works.
The cause of this is, that, while they were still sick of soul,
they did not care for their own healing, but plunged themselves
into the sea of the world in order to heal the souls of others,
being still sick themselves. So they have bereft themselves of
the hope in God as I said before, because the weakness of
their senses was not yet able to bear the touch of the rays
1) The Loudon Ms. has K'VOK' "bonds".

SIX TRKATISKS ON T[IK [UaiAVIOl'R OF EXCELLENCE 33
of [worldly] things that excite usually the vehemence of the
affections in those who still are in want of caution. I mean the
sight of women and comfort and money and worldly things, and
the passion for governing and for exalting oneself above others.
Be despised by fools for simplicity, not by the wise for au-
dacity. Seek poverty for humility's sake and do not seek riches
47 for the sake of audaciousness. Confound critics by the power
of thy virtues, not by thy word and the impudence of those
;
who will not be persuaded, by the peacefulness of thy lips,
not by sounds. Confound the lascivious by thy honourable be-
haviour and those of audacious sensuality by the chastity of
thy eyeballs that are concentrated within thee in quiet.
Deem thyself a stranger wherever thou enterest all thy life-
long T ), that thou mayest be able to flee from the great dam-
ages rising from freedom of speech.
Think concerning thyself always that thou knowest nothing,
that thou mayest be liberated from the reprehensible things
caused in thee by conceit; then thou wilt be entitled to direct
others.
Let thy mouth constantly administer blessing; then the scorn
of any one will never hurt thee. Disdain gives birth to dis-
dain, blessing to blessing.
Think concerning thyself always that thou needest teaching,
in order that thou be found a wise man during thy whole life.
Do not hand down to others as thy own, the practical ethics2
)
that thou hast not yet reached lest thou be put to shame by
;
thyself and thy deception appear from the comparison with
thy behaviour. But if thou speakest concerning what is be-
coming, speak as one belonging to the class of pupils, not as
an authority, having before subdued thy self and shown thy-
self as being less than thy listener. Then thou wilt give also
thy hearers an example of humility and thy words will spur
them unto the course towards [good] works and thou wilt be
honoured in their eyes.
48 As much as is possible for thee, speak about such things
with tears, so that it be profitable unto thyself and thy com-
panions and attract grace towards thee.
1) Hukhari, A'ihlt, 1>. 3: Be in the world as a stranger (_-o,.e dViLi' Loo\.!t £ ^).
And according to Porphyrins man in this world is a stranger, who longs for home (Zellcr,
Phil. d. Gricchen* III, 2, p. 718). Cf. Hebrews 11, 13 etc.
2) See beneath p. 40, note 1.
Vcrh, Aid. I.ettcrV. 1922 iWcusiiu'ls .

34 yix TRKATISKS ON THF. DKHAVIOUR OK FA'CKLLKNCK
If, by the grace of Christ, thou hast reached the delight of
the mysteries of the. visible created things, which is the first
summit of knowledge, then arm thy soul against the spirit of
slander. For without arms thou canst not hold thy place in
this country, but thou wouldst soon be killed secretly by the
seducers. Let thy arms be: fasting and tears which thou shedst
in constant self-humiliation-, and prudence against reading books
which accentuate the differences between the confessions, with
the aim of causing schisms, which provides the spirit of slander
with a mighty weapon against the soul.
When thy stomach is replenished, do not venture to scruti-
nize, or thou willst regret it. Understand what I say : in a full
stomach, there is no knowledge of the mysteries of God. Be
occupied with the books of God's providence intensely, without
becoming satisfied. They have been composed by holy men
and show the aim of His different works in His establishing
the different natures J of the world. Let thy mind be streng-
)
thened by them and thou wilt acquire enlightened impulses
from their subtlety; then thy mind will go its way with a clear
consciousness towards the aim of[understanding] the right scheme
of the creation of the world, according to the laudable wise
intention of the Creator of the natures.
Read in the two Testaments which God has destined for
the instruction of the whole world, so that it should be dazzled
by the power of His Providence in every generation and be
enveloped in wonder.
Such recitations and the like are very useful to this aim.
Let thy recitation take place in complete rest, while thou art
49 free from too great care for the body and from the disturbance
of practice then the recitation will give thy soul a delicious
;
taste, by the sweet insight, exalted above the senses, which
the soul, by constant intercourse with it, perceives in itself.
Do not deem the words that are founded upon experience as
the babbling of those who sell words, lest thou remain in
darkness till the end of thy life, bereft of their profit, groping
in the night in times of war, nay even falling into one of
the pits, under the pretext of |clinging to] truth.
This shall be the sign for thee, when thou art near to enter
that country when grace begins to open thy eyes so that they
:
i) Isaac uses the word "nnlure" (rdl*^) in ^ sense corresponding with oui"species".

SIX TRKATISKS ON' TUK r.KH.YVlOt'R OF KXCKI.LF.XCK 35
perceive things by essential sight, at that time thy eyes will
begin to shed tears till they wash thy cheeks even by their
multitude, and the vehemence of the senses will be calmed so
that they will be shut up within thee peacefully. If any man
teach thee otherwise, do not believe him. To ask from the
—
body anything else as a manifest sign of the real apper-
—
ception than tears, is not allowed to thee, save only if the
influence of the members of the body be silent. This takes place
when the mind is elevated above [earthly] beings and the body
is without tears, apprehension and emotionality, except only-
its natural animal existence. For this knowledge docs not stoop
to take with it as secondary companions of spiritual sight the
50 ideas of the things of the sensual world. "Whether in the body
or out of it, I do not know". It is God who knows this as
well as the fact that he has heard unutterable words ').
All that is heard by the cars can be spoken. But he did
not hear sensible sounds, nor did he [seej in a vision of cor-
poreal sensible images, but with the impulses of the mind, in
a state of rapture apart from the body, the will having no
part in it2 ). The eye never saw the like, the ear never heard
its equal and his varied knowledge never dreamt of recollecting
the likeness of what his heart saw, namely that which God
has in store to show the pure in heart when they have be-
come dead to the world not corporeal sight received through
:
the eyes of the flesh in gross distinctions, nor fantasies which
they themselves form in their mind, in a secondary way, but
simpli — city of contemplation concerning things — of intellect and
faith the contrary of partition and division that show the
images of the elements.
Fix thy gaze on the sphere of the sun according to thy
visual strength and only with the object of enjoying its rays,
noth with the aim of scrutinizing the course of its wheel, lest
even thy limited sight be taken from thee:!). If thou find honey,
eat in measure lest thou, having become satisfied, hast to
reject it. The nature of the soul is of small dimensions; and
sometimes it proceeds onwards, desiring to learn what is beyond
its nature. And many times, during the course of recitation and
51 the contemplation of things, it grasps one or more things; yet
the sum of its knowledge is insignificant as compared with
—
1) 1 Col-. 12,2 4. 2) Cf. aliiive p. 14 note 1. 3) Cf. \>. 17.

36 six trkattsks on tiil: ihchayiour of excellknok
what it found. But how far does its knowledge penetrate? (Jntil
its deliberations are clad with emotion and trembling. Then it
hastens to turn backwards from fear, venturing [from time to
time] to penetrate into the luminous things.
But fear witholds it on account of the frightfulness of these
things. And discernment warns in silence the mind of the soul
not to be audacious lest it should die. What is too hard for
thee, seek not ; what is too strong for thee, search not. Scru-
tinize with thy intellect that which has been allowed to thee,
and do not venture to approach unto hidden things. Adore
therefore and praise in silence and confess thy unability to
understand. For too much for thee has been shown to thee,
but do not trouble thyself with the rest of His works. As it
is not good to eat much honey, so it is not good to examine
laudable words. Lest, desiring to gaze from a great distance
before we have approached near, we be exhausted by the inter-
minable way, without having the power to gaze, and be injured.
For sometimes in stead of truth fantasies arise; when namely
the intellect becomes too weary to understand, and forgets its
true essence. And the wise Solomon has well said that he that
hath no rule over his own spirit, is like a city that is in ruins
and without walls l
).
It is not necessary to search for God in heaven and earth
and to send out our mind to seek Him in different places.
52 Purify thy soul, o man, and strip thyself from the thought of
recollections which are unnatural and hang before thy impulses
the curtain of chastity and humility. Thereby thou wilt find
Him that is within thee. For to the humble the mysteries are
revealed.
If thou wouldst give thyself to the service of the pure prayer
of the mind and to constant vigils in order to acquire a mind
clacl with light, withdraw thyself from the sight of the world,
and cut off intercourse by speech. And refuse to receive in
thy cell thy accustomed friend, even [if he comes] for the sake
of excellence, save only him that has the same aim as thyself
and shares in the secrets of thy behaviour. If thou art in fear
of distraction and secret psychic intercourse, which originates
spontaneously without our seeking it, cut off from thee even
outward intercourse.
I) I'rovqrtis 25,28.

.SIX TRKATISKS UN THE JiKtIAVFOUR OE EXCELLENCE $y
Let thy prayers be followed by works of excellence, that
thy soul may see the flower of the light of truth. In conse-
quence of the heart's freedom from external recollections, the
mind will receive [the gift] of ecstatic understanding of things.
The soul can easily be accustomed to interchange one occu-
pation with another if we only bestow some little care and
trouble upon it.
Burden it with the labour of reading books expounding the
narrow ways of behaviour, contemplation, and the stories ofthe
saints, even if it does not perceive delight in the beginning,
because of the darkness and disturbance originating in present
recollections; then it will interchange one habit with another.
53 Accordingly when thou risest for prayer and service, instead
of meditating worldly things, scriptural thoughts will be pictured
in the mind. And thereby the recollection of that which it saw
and heard before, will be forgotten and effaced in it. So thy
mind will reach purity. This is what has been said : the mind
is made chaste by recitation when it comes to prayer, and by
recitation it is enlightened during prayer. This means : the soul
will find strength to interchange outward distraction with the
habits of prayer, viz. essential understanding shining in the
mind on account of the wondrous recollections of that world.
How
often at those times has the power of contemplation
[stimulated by the scriptures, made silent and stupefied [the
j
solitary] during prayer and left him standing without impulses
;
the same power, that cuts off prayer by delight as I have said,
giving rest to the heart and bringing to silence its impulses, the
psychic and bodily members being in rest.
Those know what I say, who have experienced this in their
soul, who have penetrated into its mysteries, who have not
learnt it from others or snatched it from writings which so
often are found to falsify truth.
A full stomach shrinks from examining spiritual questions, as
a harlot from speaking of chastity. A conscience full of disease
abhors fat food; a mind full of the world, cannot approach
the investigation of divine service.
54 Fire cannot burn fresh wood; the love of God cannot be
kindled in a heart that loves comfort.
A harlot cannot cling to the love of one man neither can
;
the soul, that is tied to many things, cling to loving spiritual
teachings.

8 SIX TRIiATISKS ON TIIK BEHAVIOUR OK KXCELLKNCK
As he who has never seen the sun with his eyes is not
able, on the basis of hearing about it, to imagine its light in
his mind, or to receive some image in his soul, or to perceive
the beauty of its rays, so he who in his soul does not have
perception for the taste of spiritual service and whose behaviour
has never brought him experience of its mysteries so that he
is able to conceive in his mind an image resembling" the truth,
is unable to find real conviction in his soul nor to attain the
essence of the matter through human teachings and training
in writings l
).
If thou possessest anything above thy daily sustenance, go
and give it the poor and then offer unto God prayer with
frankness. This means: speak with God as a son with his
father.
There is nothing which brings the heart so near unto God
as mercy-); and nothing which gives peace to the mind as
voluntary poverty. Many will scorn thee as an ignorant because
of thy liberality and for thy giving thyself without stint for the
sake of the fear of God they will not call thee wise or steady
;
of mind, because of thy asceticism.
If any one is riding on a horse and stretches out his hand,
55 do not withdraw from him thy hand in which is that which
his need truly requires. For at that time he is needy as one
of the indigent. And what thou givest, give it with a bountiful
eye, and make thy face glad towards him. And give him above
what he asks, that which he docs not seek. Cast thy bread
upon the waters for thy shalt find remnneration after many
days 3
).
Do not make any distinction between the rich and the poor
nor know who is worthy and who is not worthy. Deem all
men worthy of bounty on thy part. Especially because thou
spurrest them unto truth thereby. The soul can easily be drawn
by corporeal things to the thought of the fear of God. Also
our Lord shared his table with publicans and harlots without
making any distinction between those who were worthy and
those who were not, seeking to spur them on thereby unto
the fear of God and to bring them, through communion in
bodily things, unto spiritual communion. Therefore deem all
1) Cf. /look of the />«tv, Sentence 3
2) Cf. tlie title i>f Chapter I. XXX I ami ;>. 8 s.|., 42

SIX TREATISES UN THE BEHAVIOUR OE EXCELLENCE 39
people worthy of bounty and honour, be they Jews or mis-
creants or murderers. Especially if they be thy brothers and
comrades who have erred from the truth on account of ig-
norance.
When thou doest well, do not wish a remuneration in this
world; for both thou wilt be recompensed by God. If possible,
do not even wish a remuneration in the world-to-come but
;
be excellent only by the love of God. The degree of love is
more intimate than that of service unto God; nay, it is more
56 intimate in its mystery, with an intimacy that surpasses that
of service as the soul's the body's.
If thou hast set for thyself the aim of renunciation, and by
the grace of God thou hast been freed from care, and exalted
above the world by thy renunciation, take care lest, on account
of thy love of the poor, thou desire to fall back into the care
of possessions and things, even with the aim of giving alms,
falling thereby into trouble, taking from one to give unto
another 1 ); for thou wouldst expose thy honour to contempt
by thy propensity to accost others in thy search for these and
cognate things and thou wouldst fall back from the height of
thy liberated mind unto care for earthly things.
Thy rank is higher than that of almsgivers. I pray thee, do
not make thyself an object of laughter. The latter is the class
of adolescents being educated the former is the way of per-
;
fection.
If thou possessest, spend at once. If not, be not desirous
to possess. Purify thy life from luxuriousness and superfluous
things; this will necessarily bring thee towards asceticism.
Necessity bears many things which our will, as long as pos-
sible, would not submit to bear. Those who have overcome
outward struggle have also annihilated inward fear and no
compulsion can force them to go its way by confounding them
with strife before and behind.
Outward struggle I name that which a man excites by the
senses against himself foolishly viz. worldly dealings, hearing
; :
57 and seeing, speech and stomach, gradually and continually as-
sociating himself with the practice of life, so that the soul is
blinded and becomes unable, because of external troubles that
meet it, to discern its self in the hidden strife that arises ; then
i) I'o take and give is an expression denoting worldly dealings.

40 SIX TRKATISKS ON Till-; ISKIIAYIOUR OV EX< F.LLKNCK
for the sake of quiet, lie subdues that which comes from within.
But if a man closes the gates of the town, there will be a
strife face to face and he will not fear from the ambushes
;
outside the town.
Blessed is the man who knows these things and endures
them in silence without even then imposing upon himself much
work, but interchanging the whole of his bodily service with
the labour of prayer, if he is able to do so, who, proceeding
from service to service, does not join anything to the worship
of God consisting in prayer and recitation, but believes that,
when serving God and meditating upon Him night and day,
He will not leave him in need of the necessary things he needs,
because he does not work for himself.
If anyone is not able to bear solitude without service, he
must necessarily have recourse to it. But he shall take it as a
helpful means only, without eagerness, and as a secondary
thing, not as a principal commandment.
This applies to the weak. Manual work is called by Fua-
grius an impediment to the recollection of God. The Fathers
have prescribed service to the indigent and despondent, not to
those who are zealous to perform their legal obligations.
When God opens thy mind from within and thou givest thy-
58 self to frequent kneelings, let no care of anything take hold of
thee, though the demons secretly persuade thee to do so then
;
see and wonder at what is born in thee from these things.
Do not compare any of the ethical practices *) with a man's
throwing himself day and night on his face before the cross,
his hands turned backwards. If thou desirest that thy fervour
may never abate, and that thy tears may never fail, then prac-
tice this. Blessed art thou, o man, if thou thinkest of what I
have told thee, without seeking any other thing night and clay.
Then thy light will be spread out like dawn and thy righteous-
ness will shortly appear 2 ). Then thou wilt be like an exulting
paradise and like a fountain never destitute of water.
Behold, how many signs of grace happen to a man from
Providence. Sometimes a man will be on his knees at the time
of prayer, his hands spread out or stretched towards heaven,
his face looking to the cross, and, so to speak his whole
emotion and mind stretched out towards God in supplication
;
r^HaM
i) 2) Cf. l's. 37,f'-

SIX TKKAT1SKS ON T11K BKIIAYIOUR Ob" HX<'KI.LKNCK 41
and while absorbed in these beseechings and pains at this time,
of a sudden a fountain of delight will spring from his heart,
his limbs will relax, his eyes be darkened, his face bow down
and his deliberations be confuse, so that even his knees arc
no longer able to lean on the earth, from the exulting joy
of the sign of grace that spreads through his whole body.
Distinguish, o man, what thou art reading, can these things
be known from ink r Or can the taste of honey be spread over
the palate of the reader, from written documents
?
59 If thou doest not seek, thou wilt not find. And if thou doest
not wake and knock fervently at the gate, without a break,
thou wilt not be answered. Who could hear these things and
be desirous of outward righteousness , unless he who is not
able to bear the bonds of the cell: But if there be anyone
who is not able to do these things, since it is a gift of God
that a man remain within the door, he should not however
desist from this other part '), lest he be bereft of the two parts
of life. For until the outward man becomes dead to the ways
of the world, not only to sin, but also to the whole bodily
service, and the inward man to the seducing recollections of
evil things, until the natural impulse is brought low and the
body has almost died through labours, so that the sweetness
of sin has no more mastery over the heart, the spirit of God
does not spread its sweetness and man's limbs are not unveiled
to life and divine impulses do not show themselves in the soul.
And as long as a man's heart is not freed from earthly care,
except those necessary things which nature imposes upon him
—
at the time of h—is necessity and which he leaves also to
God to arrange spiritual drunkenness cannot rise in him and
that madness, for which the Apostle was disdained, he will not
perceive; for the multitude of books had made him mad.
But I do not say this in despair ; namely that unless a man
reach the depth of perfection, the grace of God will not be
given him and consolation will not come to him.
Verily, when a man rejects evil things and becomes wholly
60 alienated to them, and clings to "food things, in a short time
he will be aware of profit. And if he shows only a little zeal
he will find the consolation of the forgiveness of sins in himself,
and he will be dignified with grace and receive many good
1) outward righteousness.

42 SIX TREATISES ON T1IK F.ELLVVIOl'R OK EXCELLENCE
thing's. But he is little when compared with him who has be-
come wholly alienated to the world and has found in himself
as it were the blessings of the world to come and has reached
that for the sake of which Christ reached us. To whom and
to his Father and to the Holy Ghost be glory and praise for
ever and ever. Amen.
Here ends the fourth discourse.
V
God has made great the honour of man, by the twofold
teachings he has given him. And from every side He has
opened for him a door through which he has access unto
knowledge.
Ask from nature a true witness concerning thyself, then thou
wilt not err. If thou goest yet astray, let thyself be taught by
that second witness who will bring thee back to the way from
which thou hast erred.
A distracted heart cannot help but erring. And wisdom will
not open its gate before it.
He who is able to understand through essential knowledge
to what a degree of equality all men will come in the end,
wall not seek another teacher concerning the contemptability
of the world.
61 The first book given by God to the rational beings, is the
nature of the created things. Written teachings have been
added only after aberration.
He who does not willingly remain far from things causing
sin will be drawn towards them involuntarily. Things causing
sin are wine and women, riches and bodily health. They are
not to be called sin in themselves, but on account of man's
weakne — ss and their unlawful use, nature is easily — drawn by
them more easily than by any other thing towards
•
different sins and therefore there is need of peculiar caution
in regard of them. If thou rememberst continually and recog-
nisest truly that thou art weak, thou wilt never overstep the
borders prescribed by watchfulness. Despised above all things
among men is poverty. But much more despised by God is
haughtiness of heart and a disdainful spirit.
Among men riches are honoured; by God a humble soul.

SIX TRKATLSIlS OX THE 1JEIIAVIOUR OF KXCKLMSNCK 43
When thou intendest to begin with one of the virtues, first
prepare thyself, lest, by the evil things which it causes, thou
shouldst fall into doubt concerning- the truth.
62 If the Evil one sees some one beginning with one of the
virtues in the fervour of faith, he attacks him by vehement
and terrible temptations, with the intention that he be frigh-
tened by them, so that the love of his mind may abate and
his fervour not rise again to bring him near to the works of
God. And thus, because of fear of temptations accompanying
good works [he hopes that] nobody will practise them anymore.
Thou, however, prepare thyself to meet the evil things accom-
panying virtues, bravely and strongly and then begin. If thou
doest not expect evil things, do not be ; gin with excellence. The
man who is in doubt concerning the Lord, is persecuted by
his own shadow; at the time of satiety he wall be hungry and
at the time of peace his ruin will be heavy. But whoever con-
fides in God, his heart will be strong and his honour will be
manifest before the crowds and his glory before his enemies.
The commandments of God are better than the treasures of
the whole earth. He who acquires His laws in his heart, will
find the Lord in them. He who meditates upon God in the
night, will acquire Him as a housemate. He who is pliable to
His will, will find the angels of heaven his teachers.
He who trembles before sins will pass without stumbling
even through a dangerous place and at the time of darknest
he will find a light within himself. If any one tremble before
sins, his footsteps will be guarded by the Lord and mercy will
precede his failures. He whose faults are small in his own eyes
will fall into those which are worse than the former ones and
it will be necessary that he pay for them sevenfold. Sow alms
in humility and thou wilt reap mercy in the court of justice.
5 Whereby thou hast lost goods, thereby thou shalt acquire
them again. If thou hast to pay a penny to God in some way
or other, He will not accept a pearl from thee in its place.
For in this case that thing is necessary.
If thou hast lost chastity, let not fornication take its place.
If thou givest alms as a reparation, He will not accept them
from thee; He postulates saintliness for saintliness. And if thou
wrongest not the poor, let not unjust possession take the place
of that. While thou art refraining from bread, let not injustice
usurp its place so that thou must struggle with some other thing.

;
44 SIX trkatisks on riii'; uehayiour ok i-;xci-:r.i,i;N( i-:
Oppression is eradicated by compassion and renunciation. If
thou leavest the plant in its place, thou wilt have to struggle
with some other thing, according to the word of the great
teacher Mar Afrem.
Take care not to light against heat during summer in clothes
destined for winter. Thus each will reap, with the contrary of
that with which he sows injustice. And every illness he will
combat with its peculiar antidotum. Now thou art deadly wounded
by envy; while thou strugglest against sleep. When sin is still
green, eradicate it, lest it cover the whole ground. He who
neglects an evil thing while it is small, will find it at last a
hard master and he will go in bonds before it. He who treats
it severely in the beginning, will easily rule it. He who bears
injustice with gladness while victory is in his hand, he has
received from God the consolation of his faith clearly mani-
64 fested. And he who bears oppression in humility, has reached
perfection. The angels will admire him. There is no profitable
action more difficult and more meritorious.
Do not believe thyself strong before thou hast been led into
temptations and thou hast found thyself steadfast in them. In
all things thou hast to try thyself in this way.
Acquire glory on account of the faith of thy heart, then
thou wilt tread upon the neck of thy enemies, and thou wilt
find thy mind humble. Do not confide in thy strength lest thou
be left to the weakness of thy nature and thou learnest thy
weakness in thy fall ; nor in thy knowledge , lest thou be
surrounded in thought with hidden ambushes and becomest
confused.
Acquire a humble tongue; then disdain will never hurt thee
and pleasant lips then thou wilt be found a friend of every
;
one. Do not boast of any thing with thy tongue, because among
creatures there is nothing exempt from change and thy shame
;
will be double when thou art found the contrary jof what thou
didst boast of]. Kverything of which thou boastest before men,
will surely be altered by God, so that thou mayest have a
cause for humility so that thou judge God's knowledge to be
all, and believe not that there is anything true in creatures.
Ancl when thou thinkest thus, thy eyes will at all times be
fixed upon Him.
[Divine] care surrounds all men at all times; but it is not
seen, save only by those who have purified themselves from

SIX TREATISES ON TUK BEHAVIOUR OF EXCELLENCE 45
sins and think of God perpetually. To these then it is revealed
65 clearly for when they have been led into great temptations
;
for the sake of truth, then they receive a faculty of perception
clearly as if with the eyes of the flesh. [They receive it] when
they want it,' in a sensible way, in accordance with the kind
and the cause of the temptation, in order to strengthen their
courage. As m the case of Jacob and Joshua the son of Nun,
Hananya and his companions, Petrus and others, to whom the
figure of a man appeared in order to encourage them and to
console their faith.
It thou sayest that these things were acts of Providence of
a universal nature, let then the holy martyrs console thee,
who sometimes together, sometimes one by one in separate
places have suffered for God. Not only a hidden force was
with them, by which the members of their bodies were fortified
against being hanged in irons an — d against torments of all
kinds, things beyond natural power but sometimes also holy
angels were seen by them manifestly, in order that every man
should know that God's care is with those who suffer for His
sake for any reason, so that they themselves might receive
encouragement and their torturers be ashamed. For as the
former were made conspicuous by such visions, to the same
degree the latter were tormented by their endurance.
And what shall we say about many of the solitaries and
strangers and true monks, who have made waste land habitable
and an encamping ground of the angels, who visited them on
account of their worthy behaviour? As true comrades [serving)
one Lord the heavenly hosts mingled [with them] in their
66 dwelling place , solitaries who during their whole life loved
solitude, who made holes and rocks their dwelling places, who
gladly suffered cold and heat for the love of God. And be-
cause they left the earth and loved heaven like the angels, the
angels have not concealed themselves from their sight. But
sometimes they taught them concerning behaviour. And again
they answered the questions they asked them concerning other
things. And sometimes the angels showed them the way when
they wandered through the desert; sometimes they delivered
them from temptations; sometimes they saved them from some
net of danger which suddenly, without their foreseeing it, threa-
tened them, some serpent for instance, or falling from a rock,
or a stone that suddenly fell down with violence from a height.

46 SIX TRKATISKS ON TIIK ISKIIAVIOUR OK KXCKLLKXCK
Sometimes, also under the attacks of the open battles of Satan,
the angels showed themselves to them manifestly, and clearly
announced that they were sent in order to help them and
encouraged them by their words. Sometimes also they cured
their pain and healed some injuries which had befallen them
in some way or other, by the touch of their hands. Sometimes
again they imparted to their bodies, which had been weakened
by abstention from all food, by their words or by the sudden
67 touch of their hands, a force foreign to nature, adducing in
some secret way a force unto the lowered nature. Sometimes
they brought them food, warm bread and olives, and to some of
them various fruits. Others they informed concerning the time of
their death. And how long must be the enumeration of things
concerning the love of the holy angels towards our race and
concerning the care they showed unto the righteous, as great
brothers who fostered and guarded their little ones. All this
serves to make clear for every one how near God is to His
friends and how much care He bestows on those who entrust
their life to His hands and follow Him with a serene heart.
If it is certain to thee and thou believest that God cares
for thee, thou needest not be anxious for thy body nor have
care concerning the guiding of thyself by means. But if thou
cloubtest this and desirest to care for thyself, without God,
thou art more wretched than any man, and what does life
mean to thee? Throw thy care on God 1 that thou be streng-
),
thened against all fear. He who once has entrusted his life to
God, will dwell in mental peace.
Without renunciating possessions, the soul cannot be liberated
from confusion of thought. And without quiescence of the
senses, peace of mind cannot be perceived 2 And without
).
68 entering into temptations, spiritual wisdom cannot be acquired.
And without constant reciting, subtlety of thought cannot be
learned. And without the deliberations being set at peace the
mind cannot be moved by hidden mysteries. And without the
confidence of faith one cannot venture to throw his soul amidst
sorrowful and hard circumstances. Without the practical ex-
perience of God's care the heart is not able to confide in God.
And when the soul doe^ not taste sufferings for the sake of
Christ, it is not united with Him in knowledge.
1) l's. 55,23. 2) Introduction

SIX TRKATISKS ON Till'; BKU.WIOUR OK K.VTXLKNCK 4/
Deem him a man of God, who constantly takes upon him-
self the lot of want, being moved by great compassion. Fie
who does good to the poor finds God his provider. He who
suffers want for His sake finds Him to be a great treasure.
God does not need anything; only He rejoices when anyone
satisfies or honours His image ] for His sake.
)
When anyone asks thee and thou hast, do not say in thy
heart: I will keep it for myself in order to have more comfort
by it and I will let him pass quickly ; God will provide for
him from another; I will bestow it upon myself. Do not speak
thus. For in this way think iniquitous men, and people who do
not know God deliberate thus, fostering such thoughts. But a
righteous man does not give his honour to another one nor
does he let slip the opportunity for bounty. God will provide
for him certainly in some other way; if He knows that he is
in trouble. God will not abandon any one. But thou art willing
69 immediately to leave God's honour and to throw His bounty
from thee. On the other hand rejoice if thou possessest and
give, saying Glory to thee, o Crod, who hast granted unto
:
me that I find some one to comfort. And if thou possessest
not, rejoice the more, thanking God with many thanksgivings,
saying : I thank thee, o God, who hast granted me the honour
of becoming poor for Thy sake, and who hast deemed me
worthy to taste sufferings enjoined in Thy commandments
namely illnesses and poverty such as the saints have tasted
who have gone this way.
And if thou art ill, say: Blessed are those who find in the
things which God sends us for our profit, the aim for which
God has destined them. Grod sends sickness for the sake of
the health of the soul.
One of the saints once said : The following I have taken as
a sign. When a solitary does not serve God in the right way,
and is not zealous in His works, God certainly will send him
a temptation to occupy his thoughts, lest he be wholly idle
and, by complete idleness, his mind turn aside to thinking of
the things of the left hand. But if he is not willing to think
of excellence, the influence of the temptations will cause him
to think of it and not to think of idle things. This God does
with every man who loves Him. When He sees that he begins
i) vi/. nuin

48 SIX TKFATISKS ON TIIK ISEILWTOUR OF EXfFXl.ENCF.
to disdain His works, he sends a heavy sorrow in order to
make him wise and to chastise him. Therefore, when such
'
70 people call to Him, He does not pay attention, nor does He
hasten to free them, till they have become weary and know
that they have to bear these things on account of their neglect.
'When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you
;
yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear' ]). Even
if this was said to others, still it is certainly applicable to those
who leave the way. But if God is so compassionate, why do
we then so frequently knock at His door in trouble and pray,
and yet He turns away from our prayer? He says: Behold,
the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; nor His
ear heavy, that it cannot hear. But your iniquities have sepa-
rated between you and your God, and your sins have hid His
face from you, that He will not hear a Remember the Lord
).
at all times, then He will remember thee when evil appro-
ches unto thee. He has made thy nature a receptacle of
accident. And in the world where He has created and left
thee He has made frequent the causes of accidents and temp-
tations. He has made thy nature a small receptacle of these
things. Evil things are not far from thee, neither are they a
few in number. For they rise from within thee when He gives
a sign, and from under thy feet and from the place where
thou art standing. But like one eyelid is near the other, so
temptations are near the children of men.
With wisdom God has provided these things for thee in this
way, for thy profit, that thou mayest continually knock at His
door and that, for fear of sorrowful events, the thought of Him
may constantly recur to thy mind and thou be near to God in
constant prayer and sanctified by constant thought of Him in
thy heart.
And when thou callest unto Him and He answers thee, thou
71 wilt know that thy saviour is God. And thou wilt perceive thy
God who has created thee and is thy provider and preserver,
therein that He has made in thy behalf two worlds. One for
thy instruction, as it were a school for a short time; and
another one, a paternal home and thy abode for ever and ever.
Lie has not made thee apathetic, lest thou shouldst desire
divine rank and receive what Satan received. Nor has He made
1) Is. 1, 15 2) Is. so, 1 s.[.

,
SIX TRF.ATISKS ON THE IJKUAVI(>UR Ol«' KXCKLLKNCR 49
thee incapable of error or, lest thou shouldst be like the beings
which are bound and thou shouldst receive thy good and thy
evil without profit or remuneration as the other corporeal beings
on the earth. How many blows and humiliations together with
thanksgivings are born from the capacity for affections, and
fear, and also error, is manifest for every one so that it should
be known that our zeal for righteousness and our turning aside
from evil are of our will, and that the honour and disdain,
caused thereby, should be put to our credit. Thus we are put
to shame and we fear on account of disdain but we thank
•,
God and press towards the good on account of honour.
All these instructions He has multiplied for thee, lest freed
from them on account of thy not needing them or thy nature
not being capable of them, exalted above fear and affecting
things, thou shouldst forget God and turn away from Him and
invent many gods. For though subjected to affections and want,
which scourges were sent against them on account of palt—ry
72 riches and short-lived temporal power and precarious health,
still many have not only invented many gods, but have even
ventured in their insanity to pretend to be of divine nature.
Therefore He has turned thee away from all these things
through that which troubles thee from time to time, lest He
should be angry with thee on account o( thy turning aside and
destroy thee from before Him in punishment.
I omit the ungodliness and the sins that arise from health
and lack of fear and comfort, even though that which has been
mentioned above should not happen 1). Therefore, by sufferings
and distress He has caused thee frequently to recall Him in
thy heart-, and by fear of adversities He incites thee to turn
towards the gate of his mercy. By liberating thee from these
[troubles] He sows in thee causes of love unto Him. And when
thou hast found love he brings thee near to the honour of the
sons He shows thee the richness of His bounty and the stead-
;
fastness of His care for thee. Then He will make thee perceive
the holiness of His honour and the hidden mysteries of the
nature of His greatness. How shouldst thou have become ac-
quainted with these things if there had not been adversities?
For through these the love of God is able to increase, viz. bv
understanding His acts of bounty and by recalling His various
l) viz. that creatures protend to lie of divine nature.
Vcrli. AIM, l.,:lt.:rk. u,-.:: WYnMiirk

50 SIX TREATISES ON TIM': HKIIAYIOfU OF EXCELLENCE
acts of care. All this good is born for thee from things causing
grief, if thou knowest to give thanks.
Therefore remember God, that Me may remember thee con-
stantly and when Me remembers thee and saves thee, thou
;
wilt receive ail these goods. Forget Him not in idle distraction,
lest He also forget thee in thy temptations.
73 In prosperity be near to Him and obedient, that thou mayest
have freedom of speech with Him in trouble because of thy
constantly being near to Him in thy heart by means of thy
prayer. Sit before His face all thy time, thinking of Him and
recollecting Him in thy heart, lest, seeing Him only after long
thou shonldst lack freedom of speech with Him on account of
bashfulness. A high degree of freedom of speech is born from
constant intercourse. Constant intercourse with men is of a
bodily nature that with God is psychic meditation and offerings
;
in prayers.
On account if its intensity this meditation is sometimes mingled
with ecstasy. For the heart of those who seek the Lord rejoices.
Seek the Lord, ye sinners and be strengthened in hope in your
thoughts. Seek His face by repentance at all time and you will
be sanctified by the holiness of His face and you will be. puri-
fied from your unrighteousness. Speed unto the Lord, ye un-
righteous, the Lord who forgives unrighteousness and effaces
sins. For He has sworn : I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked; but that he turn from his way and live1 ). I have
spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious and dis-
obedient people"). And why will ye die, O house of Jacob?3
)
Turn unto me, then I will turn unto you 4 ). And by Ezekiel
He says When the wicked turns from his way unto the Lord
:
and do that which is lawful and right, the sins he has com-
74 mitted will not be remembered but he shall live, sayeth the
Lord "). Thus it is also with the righteous ; when he turneth
from bis righteousness and comitteth sin and iniquity, the righ-
teousness he has done will not be remembered but I will lay
a stumbling block before him and by the iniquity he has done
he shall die if he remains steadfast in it"). Why is this? Because
the iniquitous will not stumble on account of his iniquity after
he turns unto the Lord. But the righteousness of the righteous
i) Ez. 33,11. 2) Is. 65,2. 3) Ez. 33,11. 4) Znch. 1,3.
5) <T. HZ. 33, ,9. 6) <:f. Ez. 33., .8.

Sr.K TKKA'ITSliS ON Tl\K 1IKIIAVTOUR OF KXCKLLKNCK 51
will not save him when he sins, if he builds his building on
that foundation.
And to Jeremia He spake thus: Take a roll of a book, and
write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee, from
the day of Josia the king of Juda even unto this day. It
may be that [the house of Juda] will hear and fear and they
may return every man from his evil way and turn again unto
me, that I may forgive their sins 1 ). And the sage has said:
He that covereth his sins, shall not prosper. But whoso con-
fessed! and forsaketh them, shall have mercy from God 3
).
And Jesaja, who w-as rich in revelations, says: Seek ye the
Lord and call ye upon Him when ye have found Him. And
when He is near let the sinner forsake his way and the un-
rioghteous man his thoughts. Let him turn unto me and I
ts
will have mercy upon him and to our God for He will abun-
dantly pardon. Lor my thoughts are not your thoughts neither
are my ways your ways 3 ). Wherefore do ye '*) spend money
on that which is not bread? and your labour for that which
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that
which is good. Come unto me, hear and your soul shall live').
75 When thou keepest the ways of the Lord and doest His will,
then thou wilt confide in the Lord. Then thou wilt call on Him
and He will answer thee thou wilt cry and He will say Lo,
; :
here I am.
The wicked when evil befalls him has confidence in God to
call on Him. And he is not able to expect His salvation, be-
cause he has left His ways in the days of his prosperity.
Seek a helper for thyself before thou hast to struggle.
Seek a physician for thyself before thou art ill. Pray before
distress has reached thee ; then in the time of distress thou wilt
find prayer (?) and it will answer thee. Pray and ask before
thou stumblest. Prepare thy gifts before thou makest a vow,
they are thy provisions.
The ark was constructed in time of peace. A hundred years
before its wood was planted. So when anger came, the wicked
who had been comfortable in their wickedness, were confounded.
But the ark was a refuge for the righteous.
The wicked shuts his mouth during prayer. Inward baseness
takes away freedom of speech from the heart.
I) Cf. Jeremia 36,2 sq. 2) I'rov. 28,13. 3) Is. 55,6—8.
4) The Syriac text adds not. 5) Cf. Is. 55,2 sq.

52 SIX TREATISES O.N THE JSEHAVlOUR OK EXCELLENCE
Steadfastness of the heart makes tears of joy to flow during
the imploration fof Godj.
Strong- endurance of injustice borne by free will purifies the
heart. Endurance of injustice is based on contempt for the
world. That a man remains steadfast during oppression without
being distressed, is caused by the fact that the heart begins
to see the truth. Joy on account of oppression and injustice
borne by free will, exalts the heart. No one can bear oppression
and injustice with a glad will, save those whose deliberations
have wholly become dead to the world.
Those whose thoughts are wholly filled with the odour of
76 this life, are made to blaze with anger at once through vain
glory or they fall into thoughts of spite, born of (the love of
;
vain glory]. O how difficult is this excellence, and how honoured
it is with God! He who denies this behaviour, has to go
abroad and to leave his country. It is difficult for a man to
accomplish this exalted excellence in his country the eminent
-,
and the strong only are able to bear the grief that is born of
this behaviour, among their acquaintances and also those who
in their lifetime have become dead to this life and have aban-
doned hope of the consolation of this time. As Grace is near
to humility, so are difficult accidents to haughtiness.
The heart of the Lord is towards the humble, to comfort
them. The face of the Lord is against the haughty to humi-
liate them. Humility receives compassion continually. But
,
hardness of heart and unbelief meet hardships continually that
seem hopeless till of a sudden evil rises against them and
they are delivered to destruction.
Make thyself small among men, then He will exalt thee even
above the heads of the people. Let thy prostration be low be-
fore all men and be the first to salute then thou wilt be
;
honoured more than he who brings gold from Ophir. Be des-
pised and rejected in thine own eyes, then thou wilt see the
glory of God within thyself.
77 Where humility sprouts, there glory will rise. If thou
strivest publicly after dishonour among men he will make thy
honour great. And if thou art humble in thy heart, He will
show thee His glory in thy heart. Be disdained in thy greatness,
not great in thy being disdained. Learn to be disdained, while
being full of the honour of the Lord; not, to be honoured
while being injured by ulcers within. Reject honour, then thou

SIX TREATISES ON THE ISEIIAVIOUR OK EXCELLENCE 53
wilt be honoured. Do not love it, lest thou be rejected. Ifthou
pursuest honour, it will flee from thee. If thou fleest from it,
it will rise for thee from the place where thou hidest thyself
and it will be a herald of thy humility to every one.
If thou givest thyself to disdain in order to be honoured,
the Lord will confound thee. If thou rejectest thyself for the
sake of truth He will command the creatures to praise thee.
And they will reveal to thee the glory of the creator who from
eternity speaks through them and they will glorify thee as the
creator, because thou art His thrue ima^oe.
Has anyone found a man whose behaviour is exalted, who
is despised among men and who is enlightened and wise and
poor in spirit? Blessed is he who has humbled himself in all
things, for he will be magnified in all things. He who has
humbled and made himself small for the sake of God, will be
glorified by God. And whoever for His sake is hungry and
thirsty, He will give to drink him from His good a wine
causing a drunkenness that never leaves those who drink it.
And he who goes naked for His sake will be clad by Him
with a garment of glory. And he who is poor and indigent
7* for His sake, his consolation will be established in His true
richness. Make thyself disdained for the sake of God, then thy
glory will be great, even if thou doest not perceive it.
During thy whole life deem thyself as a sinner, then thou
wilt found to be a righteous man during thy whole life. Be
despised though wise, and do not err in thy wisdom. Be simple
in thy wisdom and do not assume the appearance of being wise
if thou art simple. If humility elevates the despised how, much
more will it elevate the honoured.
Flee from praise, then thou wilt be praised. Fear haughtiness,
then thou wilt be exalted. For pride was not assigned to the
children of man, nor haughtiness of heart to those born from
a woman.
If thou hast voluntarily renunciated the whole body of the
world, do not quarrel with anyone concerning small parts of it.
If thou hast rejected glory, flee from those who hunt praise.
Flee from possessors as from possessions. Depart from the
luxurious, as from luxury. Flee from the lascivious, as from
fornication. If the memory of their habits troubles the mind,
how much more if one see and be near to them. Be near to
the excellent; through them thou wilt be near unto God.

54 SIX TRKATISKS OX Till!; LUUIAYTOUR OF KXCKLLKNCK
Be an ascctc with the humble, to learn from his ways. If
to see his habits is profitable to those who see him, how much
more the character of his behaviour and teachings received
from his very lips.
Love the poor through them thou wilt find mercy. Do not
;
approach unto the quarrelsome, lest thou be compelled to leave
thy peaceful customs.
Flee not from the ugliness of the illness of the sick, for thou
art also clad with flesh. Do not contend with the bitter in
79 heart, lest thou be beaten with the rod with which they are
beaten and seeking a consolator, wilt not find any. Do not
reject the cripples lest thou enter Sheol with them.
Love the sinners but reject their works. Do not despise them
because of their shortcomings, lest thou be tempted by the same.
Remember that thou sharest in the stink of Adam and that
thou too art clad with his illness. To him who needs passionate
prayer and soft words, do not give blame in stead, lest thou
cause his destruction and his soul be demanded from thy hand.
Resemble the physicians who use cold medicines against symp-
toms of fever.
Compel thyself to show honour to thy fellow man, when
thou meetest him and kiss his hand and his foot, and warm
;
thy heart with love unto him, piously. And take his hands
several times and place them upon thy eyes and caress them
with great honour. And attribute to his person beautiful things,
that do not belong to him. And also when he is absent, speak
about him fine and beautiful things and call him by several
honourable names. By these things and the like, thou com-
pellest him not only unto the desire of beautiful things, since
he will be ashamed of the renown thou imputest him without
his deserving it and so thou wilt be able to sow in him the
seed of excellent things, but by means of these habits and the
80 like to which thou accustomest thyself, thou wilt found in thy-
self peaceful and humble customs and be liberated from many
severe struggles, against which others learn to guard themselves
by steady works. And not only this. But if he, who receives
these honours from thee, has any shortcoming or fault of
will, he will easily acquire from thee healing, if thou lettest
him clearly perceive [it] but for an instant only ; for he will
be ashamed because of the honour shown to him and because
of the sign of love he constantly perceives in thee.

SIX TRKATISKS ON Till'; 1SKIIAVIOUR OF KXi'KLLKNCK 55
This be thy aim regarding all men. And when thou becomest
angry at any one and zealous for the sake of faith, or on
account of his evil works, or thou reprehendest and vituperatest
him, then be cautious. We all have a just judge in heaven.
But if thou art merciful and seekest to turn him unto the
truth, thou hast to suffer for him. And with tears and in love
thou must speak to him without being enraged against him,
effacing all sign of hostility from thy face. Love does not know
how to be angry ; it is not indignant, it does not despise so
as to cause suffering. Wherever the sign of love and knowledge
is present, it is profound humility rising from the inner mind.
VI
81 The fact that a man may fall into accidental faults, proves
the weakness of his nature, namely that our nature necessarily
is liable to such things. It has not seemed crood unto God that
it would be profitable for him that he should be wholly exalted
above this [weakness], before his nature arrived at the second
creation. The fact of his being subject to chance, is profitable
for the subjugation of the mind. But the constant [falling into
faults] causes audacity.
There are three modes by which every rational soul may
approach unto God: by the fervour of faith; by fear; by
punishment from God. For it cannot approach unto the rank
of love by its own power ; but only if it is based on one of
these modes.
As from a disordered l ) belly confusion of thought is born,
so, from wantonness in speech and confusion of habits, igno-
rance and folly of mind.
The care of practical things confuses the soul, and the dis-
traction of work disturbs the mind and makes it lose its quiet-
ness and drives away from it its peacefulness. It is becoming
for the solitary who has devoted himself to heavenly work,
that his mind be constantly free from care so that, when he
examines his soul and deliberates, he may not see in it any
thing belonging to this world, nor desire of any visible object,
12 but that, on account of his complete absorption from temporary
1) Cf. Thomas a Kcmpis' inordiuatiis.

56 SIX TREATISES OX Till-: BKIIAVIOIR OK EXCELLENCE
things, he may be able to meditate upon the law of the Lord
night and day, without any distraction.
Bodily works without mental beauty are like a barren womb
and dry breasts they do not bring any nearer unto the know-
;
ledge of God. They have no care for a body labouring to
eradicate passions from the mind-, so they do not reap anything.
As a man who sows on thorns and is not able to reap, so
is he whose mind is injured by care and wrath and desire of
gathering treasures, and who sighs on his bed on account of
the frequency of his vigils and abstinence. Witness is the scrip-
ture that says: As a nation that did righteousness and forsook
not the ordinance of their God they ask of me the ordinances
:
of justice; they take delight in coming near unto God. Where-
fore have we fasted and thou seest not' Have we afflicted our
soul and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of
your fast ye find pleasure and sacrifice unto all your idols r j.
This means the evil designs and the evil thoughts hold you
:
in yourself in stead of God and sacrifice to them your liberty,
a thing esteemed at all times;'the sacrifice which is honoured
above all things and which you ought not to omit, consists
of your good works' and pious inner being. A good land which
makes its lord rejoice by yielding an hundredfold, is the soul
s3 that is made excellent by meditation on God, in vigil day and
night. The Lord will build upon its foundations and around
it, a cloud for shade during the day and a shining flame of
fire during the night. From within its darkness, light will dawn.
As a cloud obscures the rays of the moon, so the vapour
of the stomach obscures the divine wisdom so that the soul
does not see it2 ). As a hearth burning with dry wood, so is
bodily desire in a full stomach. As oily matter excites the
fierceness of a flame, so does the humidity of food the carnal
passion in the body.
The knowledge of God does not dwell in a body that loves
comfort.
A man who loves his body will not be deemed worthy of
divine gifts.
As from the travail a fruit is born that gladdens the woman,
so from labours there is born in the soul the knowledge of
God's mysteries. To the pusillanimous and those who love
l) Is. 5S,2 sq. 2) Cf. Book of Che Dors p. 27 note 3.

SIX TKLATISKS ON T11K BKIIAVIOUK OI-' LXCKLLLNCK 57
comfort, a fruit is born that causes shame. As a father shows
mercy unto his son, so Christ shows mercy unto the body that
performs labours, and He is near its mouth at all times. The
labour of wisdom is priceless.
A stranger is he who is strange is his spirit unto every
habit of this world. A mourner ') is he, who spends all the
days of this life in hunger, thirst and mourning, for the sake
of the expectation of heavenly hope. A recluse is he who,
84 removing his abode from the sight of the world, and looking
beyond, has only one demand in prayer: the desire of the
world to be. The riches of the solitary are in his heart2 ). The
riches of the solitary are either consolation granted him from
the midst of mourning, or gladness that dawns from faith, the
treasury of his spirit. The compassionate is he, whose spirit
does not distinguish, when practising compassion, any of the
classes of men. Virginity is this, that a man not only guards
his body from the corruptions of revelling, but that he also
guards his chastity against his soul even when he is alone. It
thou desirest chastity, restrain the course ofimpure deliberations,
by occupying thyself with recitation and constant beseechings
unto God. Then thou wilt be armed also in thy inner being
against the things that spring from nature. Without those, man
is able to see purity in himself.
If thou art desirous to acquire compassion, first train thyself
to acquire contempt for [outwardj things, lest their importance
draw the mind away from the aim which it has set before itself.
The purity of compassion is known from patience in bearing-
wrong, and the perfection of humility from idle oppression borne
gladly. If thou art really compassionate, thou wilt not be angry
within thyself, when thou art bereft of thy possessions iniquitously
and with injustice; and thou wilt not show thy suffering openly
unto others, but let the sin of thy injustice be effaced by pas-
85 sionate compassion, as the headiness of wine is abated by
[mixing it with] much water. But show thou the mark of purity
that arises from great mercy, by adding there-unto other things
and do well to those who do thee wrong, with gladness, as also
the blessed Elisha did unto his enemies, which were come to
take him prisoner who, by praying and by blinding their eyes
1) r^\or^, also a worrl fur monk.
2) Supplied from London Mss.

58 MX TREATISES O.V THE 1IEIIAVKHR OE EXCELLENCE
by visions, made manifest the power at his disposal. And if he
had wished this, they would have been annihilated before him
;
but by providing them with food and drink and letting them go
away, he made manifest the mercy he possessed within himself.
If thou art truly humble, be not troubled if thou art op-
pressed. And do not excuse thyself in any point, but actually
take upon thee the wrong laid to thy charge, without being
anxious to persuade people that the matter is otherwise. On
the contrary, pray that thou mayest obtain forgiveness. Some
have taken upon them the evil name of fornication and others
have taken upon them deeds of adultery for which they were
too pious, and the fruit of a sin which they had not committed
they made appear serious by bewailing it as if it were their
own. And they implored forgiveness for sins which they had
not committed from their oppressor with tears, while their soul
was crowned with the full purity of chastity. Others, lest they
should be praised on account of wonderful deeds performed in
secret, have assumed the habits of lunatics, though they were
in the full possession of their wits and their serenity; so that
86 the holy angels, in admiration of these deeds, became spec-
tators of the greatness of such men. Thou however, hast
,
assumed humility where those others have given witness against
themselves ; thou art not even able to keep silence if thou art
accused, and yet thou deemest thyself to be humbler If thou
art [really] humble, try thyself by these things, whether or not
thou art troubled.
The many mansions in the house of the Father denote the
spiritual degrees of the inhabitants of that place. This means
:
the different gifts and the spiritual ranks in which they rejoice
spiritually, and the variety of the classes of gifts. It is not to
be understood in such a manner, that every person has really
his defined portion in the various local habitations, so that
[these differences] manifest themselves openly in the variety ot
particular mansions apponited for every one but they are to
;
be compared with the personal advantage every one of us
obtains by the. personal yet common use of this apperceptive
sun in accordance with the purity of his visual power. Thus
as the eyelid regulates the effusion of the quality of light, and
as a lamp1 ), in one and the same house, distributes the use of
1) The same comparison is used by Oha/ali, ihyii\ III, p. 4.

y
SIX TREATISES ON THK DlillAVlOUU. OE EXCELLENCE 59
its light in a varied fashion, although the lamp itself is not
bereft of the simplicity of its light, so as to become many with
its varied aspects, so, those who have been deemed worthy
of that place, although dwelling in one mansion, indivisible as
it is into parts, attract, at a fixed time, from one and the same
intelligible sun, every one according to the rank of his beha-
87 viour, the own delight, in one air and one place and one
abode and with one sight and one mode. The high degree of
his neighbour's rank is not seen by him who is inferior, namely
not as if it arose from the many gifts of his neighbour and
from the scarcity of his own gifts, so that it should be to him
a cause of grief and spiritual torment, absit To think such
!
things in the place of delights were impossible. Every one
rejoices within himself at the gift he has been deemed worth
of, and at the height of his rank. But the outward aspect of
them all, is one; and the place is one. And what is still truer,
they dwell as in encampments of angels, in one aereal abode,
in equality of actual vision, with secret consciousness of their
[different] ranks, in contemplative revelations that vary accor-
ding to their degree.
If real personal beings possess, apart from working apper-
ceptive power, also spiritual impulses, no one will venture, even
in the world to be, to proclaim in words an order of things
deviating from this one that [that the only differentiation is with
:
regard to] the intellect and further [spiritual] powers, even
though [this differentiation) be very manifest on account of the
perfection of nature. True, therefore, is the word spoken by
the Fathers : on the one hand there is ignorance for an un-
determined time ; on the other hand there is a limited time
for the manifestation of its abrogation, together with [the reve-
lation of] other peculiar mysteries that are defined in silence
by the [supreme] being. For there is no mean between com-
88 plete elevation and absolute abasement, in the future separation.
Either one belongs wholly to the high ones or wholly to the
low ones. But within this and the other [state] there are varying
modes of retribution.
And if this be true, as it is true, what then is the folly of
some, who say: I do not desire to be in the kingdom-, if I
only could strive after salvation from hell. Being saved from
hell is the kingdom. And being without the kingdom is hell.
For the scriptures do not teach three places [in the world to

00 SIX TRKATlSliS ON Till'; liKHAVlOUK OK EXVKLLKNCK
be]. What do they teach? When the son of man shall come
in his glory, he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the
goats on the left 1 ). Here the scriptures do not mention three
classes, but two those of the right hand and those of the
:
left. The difference between the dwelling place is given dis-
tinctly. And these, it says, shall shine forth as the sun in the
kingdom of the father a ), and those [will depart] into everlasting
lire:!). Further: They shall come from the east and west, and
shall sit clown with Abraham in the kingdom l). And the
children of the promise that have not been obedient shall go
into the darkness outside the kingdom. There will be psychic
weeping and grinding of teeth, which is a grief more hard
than the fire. Now thou understandest that to remain far from
that elevation means torturing hell.
It is beautiful for a man to admonish mankind unto bean-
s'.) tiful things and to bring them, by his constant care, from error
to the knowledge of life. And this is the stage of our Lord
and the apostles, and it is very elevated. But if he perceives
within himself, that by familiar and constant intercourse, his
inner being becomes injured by the sight of [worldly) things,
and his serenity is disturbed so as to lose its discernment, and
is darkened , since his spirit still acquires cautiousness and
stricter submission of the senses. For he is sick as long as his
senses are not yet healed and wishing to heal others, he loses
:
his own partial health of soul and quits the chaste freedom of
his will for a troubled mind. Such a one has to recall the
word of the apostle who says Strong meat belongeth to the
:
healthy "'), and he shall turn back, lest he hear from them,
How
symbolically : art thou a physician for others, yet full of
wounds thyself? Accordingly he shall keep to himself and
guard his own health only. Then instead of audible words he
shall care ") for a beautiful behaviour, and others will profit
not by his spoken words, but by the health in which he holds
himself, if possible. Thus by his health they will be healed,
even though he be absent, [thay is to say] by the zeal of his
excellent deeds, which is a more excellent thing than to serve
them merely with words, while sick himself, and in need of
healing more than they themselves.
l) Matthew 25,32. 2) Matthew 13,43. 3) Matthew 25.41. 4) Matthew 8,11.
5) Hebrews 5, 14. 6) Read .XJSttXJ

SIX TKKATISF.S OX THK I!KIFAVT(>UR OF KXCKLLENCK 6
I
For if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch l).
90 For strong meat belongeth to the healthy and to those whose
senses have been trained and strengthened so as to receive
all kinds of food, that is [those that are strengthened] against
all sensual shocks, because the heart is healthy on account of
its training in perfection.
But when Satan desires to defile the chaste spirit by thoughts
of fornication, he first tempts its endurance by vain glory, since
the beginning of such a thought does not resemble that of the
affections. This he does with the guarded spirit into which he
cannot easily instill a thought which is purely evil. But when
he that was strong, by meditating on old thoughts has left his
fortress and when he is at some distance from it, Satan causes
him to be assailed by full opportunity of fornication, by asso-
ciating the spirit with lascivious things.
At first the spirit feels a sudden terror when it meets them,
because of the chastity of the deliberations that meet the
[worldly] things, for the mind, their governor, has refrained
from looking at them before. But it falls from the height of
its original thought, even though it be not defiled. And it does
not turn and regains quickly the former deliberations which
are the cause of the secondary ones, then, when it meets often
with these things, custom will blind the discernment of the soul
through frequency of meeting. So in accordance with the quan-
tity and the character of the first affection, is the submission
to the second.
To avoid the affections by the recollection of virtues is
easier and more beautiful than to vanquish them in strife. For
when the affections leave their place and are in motion so as
9' to show themselves at strife, then they also print on the spirit
forms and images. [People of] this rank 2 possess a great
)
valiance, so that they draw strength from the spirit but the
;
mind is greatly disturbed and troubled. By the former way of
proceeding mentioned, even the traces of affections are not
known in the spirit when they have departed.
Bodily labours and meditating upon the scriptures preserve
purity. And labours are made firm by hope and fear. Hope
and fear arc established in the spirit by seclusion from the
1) Matthew 15, 14.
2) Nrmielv those ulm van<jni>,h llie nftretinn-;.

62 SIX* TRI-WTISKS ON* THE I'.KHAVIOl'R OF KXCKLLKXCE
children of man and by constant prayer '). Until man has
received the Comforter, he needs written documents2 ), in order
to fix in his heart, by images, profitable recollections. And by
constant meditation upon them, he will renew the attractions
of excellence and see in himself caution against the narrow
paths of sin for he does not yet possess the dominating force
;
of spirit which reduces to oblivion those powers which bereave
man of profitable recollections and adduce in him languor by
distraction of mind.
But when spiritual force enters and dwells in the intelligible
forces of the operative soul, then there are fixed in the heart
in stead of written laws spiritual commandments, which the
heart learns secretly from the spirit, which does not need the
help of sensible material 3 by the medium of the senses.
)
Whenever the mind learns from matter this instruction is
followed by error and forgetfulness. T3ut whenever it draws
instruction from incorruptible things, its recollection will also
be incorruptible, founded on their intelligible nature.
92 There are good deliberations and there is a good will. There
are evil deliberations and there is an evil heart. The former,
without the latter are of little account for remuneration. The
latter are impulses which blow over the mind, as the winds
that blow over the sea causing waves to arise. But the latter
are the roots. And in accordance with the fundamental direction
is also the good or the bad remuneration not in accordance
;
with the motion of the deliberations. For the soul does not
cease from setting into motion varying deliberations, and if
thou calculatest a remuneration for all these even though they
have no root beneath, thou wilt be near to changing thy
remuneration and thy retributions thousand times every day.
A young bird without wings is the mind that has lately left
the bonds of the affections, by means of the works of repen-
tance. At the time of prayer it strives to exalt itself above
earthly things, but it cannot. For it creeps still on the surface
of the earth, where also the serpent crawls. But it concentrates
its deliberations by recitation and works and fear and care for
excellent qualities. For beyond these it does not yet know
anything. And these keep the mind pure for a short time. But
I) rWlft^a 2) Lilt.: impressions in ink.
reV^oVsa
3)

SIX TRKATISES ON Til]-. P.KWAVTOL'R OF KXCFLT.FNCI'; 63
then recollections will return, troubling: and defiling: the heart.
For he does not yet perceive the air of peace and liberty,
which concentrates the mind for a long time, [keeping it] quiet
without any recollection of [worldly] things. For it has still
93 wings of flesh, viz. bodily virtues which are exercised openly.
But is does not yet see and perceive the theoretical significance
of the virtues exercised, which consists in wings of the mind
by which it approaches unto heavenly things and is removed
far from the earth.
As long as man serves God in a way that can be perceived
by the senses and in [outward] things, the prints of things will
be delineated in his deliberations and his mind will think of
divine things in bodily forms. But when he perceives that which
is within things, then, according to the measure ofits appercep-
tive power, the mind will also be exalted above the forms of
things in due time. The eyes of the Lord are upon the humble
and His ears are willing to hear them l). The prayer of the
humble [goes] as it were from his mouth unto [God's] ear : O
Lord, my God, let my darkness be enlightened. When thou
art [occupied] in solitude with the beautiful work of humility,
when thy soul is near unto coming forth from under the dark-
ness, this will be thy sign thy heart will burn and glow as
:
with fire, night and day, so that thou wilt esteem all earthly-
things as ash and dung. This means that it will not even
please thee to touch food, on account of the pleasure of the
new, fervent deliberations, which move continually within thee.
Then, of a sudden, the fountain of tears will be given thee,
so that they flow from thy eyes, as the waters of brooks,
without compulsion, mingling themselves with all thy work, viz.
with thy recitation and with thy prayer, with thy service and
with thy meditation, with thy food and with thy drink, with
all that thou doest tears will stream. If thou observest this in
94 thyself, take heart, thou hast passed through the sea. Continue
thy labours, keep thy cautiousness sound that thy grace may
augment from day to day. As long as thou hast not yet met
with these things, thy way has not yet finally reached the
mountain of God.
If this state vanishes after thou hast found it and if this
fervour abates, without thy proceeding to take another thing
I) <T. Ps. :,4,,5.

64 SIX TRKATISKS <>X Till': liKIlAVIOL'k OK KXCKfJ.KNfT.
as its substitute, woe to thee, what hast thou lost Either thou
!
hast become haughty, or thou art lax. What is it that is
situated after tears, and what a man meets after having passed
beyond them, and what there is further after this latter state,
we will describe beneath, in those chapters which deal with
the course of behaviour, as a thing concerning" which we are
enlightened by the scriptures and by the Fathers who were
entrusted such mysteries.
If thou hast no works thou shalt not speak about excellence.
Dearer to God are trials for righteousness' sake, than all vows
and sacrifices. And dearer is the odour of the sweat of the
fatigue they cause, than all the drugs of sweet scent and ex-
quisite perfumes.
All excellence, which does not vex the body, must be deemed
by thee a miscarriage without a soul. The sacrifices of the righ-
teous are the tears of their eyes, and their acceptable offerings
are the sighs of their vigils. The saints lament because of the
dulness of the body and they sigh and send their prayers unto
God with suffering. And at the voice of their lamentations the
95 holy hosts assemble to them in order to give them heart
through hope and to console them. The holy angels are their
partners during the temptations and sufferings of the saints,
because they are near to them.
Labours and humility make man a God on the earth.
Faith and compassion give a speedy advance to clearness.
Fervour and a broken heart cannot dwell in one soul neither
;
do those that are drunk know control of their mind. When
.
fervour has been given, sorrow and mourning are taken away.
Wine has been given for gladness, and fervour for the joy of
the soul. The former warms the heart, the word of God the
mind. Those who are kindled by fervour, are transported to
the world to be in their deliberations by meditations of hope.
As to those who are drunk with wine, various hallucinations
present themselves, so he, who is drunk and is ablaze does not
know trouble, nor the world nor anything in it. These things
happen to those who are simple of heart and fervent with hope.
The many things which will happen unto those who go the
traditional course of behaviour after long labours of purification
are tasted by them, in the beginning of the way, by faith of
soul only. All that the Lord wills, He does.
Blessed arc; those who. in the sea oftroubles, keep themselves

SIX TRKATISKS OX THE UKUAVIOUR OV KX< KLLKXCI': 65
simple and avoid investigation, in fervour to God, without
turning their back, for they will quickly be safe in the harbour
of the promises and rest in the mansions attained by all who
labour well. There they are consoled for their toiling, exulting
96 with the joy of their hope.
Those who proceed with hope, are not liable to see the
injuries on the way neither are they able to investigate the
;
like. But when they have gone ashore they appear unto them,
and they praise God [thinking ofj how they have been guarded
amidst all those storms and the many cliffs of which they were
unconscious, because they were not anxious to look at such
things. But those who cherish serious thoughts and wish to
deal very prudently, and give themselves up to evolving deli-
berations and to bear and make many preparations, and wish
to see and to deliberate the causes of injuries and thoughts
of relaxation, such are usually constantly found at the door of
their houses. For the slothful man saith, There is a lion with-
out, I shall be slain in the streets *). And as those who said :
And there we saw the giants, and we were in our own sight
as grasshoppers "). And the cities are strong and walled up to
heaven ;?). These are the people who at the time of death are
found at the beginning of their way. They are those who
constantly wish to act prudently, but never to begin. But the
simple swims and passes with his first ardour. He does not
think of the body nor of the possibility that his commerce
will not prosper.
Let not the greatness of thy wisdom be a stumbling-block
for thyself and a snare before thee, preventing thee from be-
ginning manly and quickly, in the hope in God, thy course
97 cleansed with blood, lest thou be constantly needy and devoid
of the knowledge of God.
He who looks at the winds will not sow. Better for us is
death in the war for [the sake of] God, than a life of shame
and baseness1 ). If thou wilt begin with one of the works ofGod,
make thy testament beforehand as one who has no further life
in this world and as one prepared for death. Draw near to it
without hope, as one whose end will be reached in that action
and as if it will be the end of thy days without thy seeing
any more. Let this be truly decided in thy mind, lest victory
i) L'roverbs 22,13 2) Xnmbcrs 13,33 3) Pen I. I,2.S 4) Cf. p. 31
Wi-li. Af.l. I..-ii,tI. ,,,-j ,'\YYi.-;iiD-k'.. =

66 SIX TKKATfSKS ON THE UFAIAV10l*R OK KXCKI.LEXCK
be taken from thee through hope of life, being a cause of
spiritual laxity.
Therefore let not wisdom reign wholly over thy actions. Give
quickly room also to faith in thy spirit. Remember constantly
the clays after death and let laxity never enter thy soul, ac-
cording to the word of the sage who has said A thousand
:
years in this world are not like one day in the world of the
righteous ]
).
Begin manly with every work of excellence do not approach
•,
it with a double heart. Do not doubt in thy heart, on the way
of thy course, of the hope of God's grace, lest thy toiling
become in vain and the work of thy service become heavy
for thee. But believe in thy heart that God is merciful and
saves grace to those who seek Him, not in accordance with
our service but in accordance with the love of our soul and
with our faith in Him. For as thou hast believed, so it will
happen unto thee.
Some are occupied by knocking their head the whole
day in stead of by their services; and with some, perpetual
kneelings take the place of the number of their prayers. Some
are occupied by the course of their tears in stead of by their
canonical [duties] without seeking any thing besides, because
it is better to them than all other things. Some fulfill the laws
prescribed to them by their zeal for their spiritual meditations,
by their suffering from hunger which cats away their flesh.
Some are withheld from accomplishing their work, by the tor-
ments which torture their stomach. Some do not make a break
in their reciting- of Psalms on account of their spiritual fervour.
The heart of some is set aflame by written words; some are
captivated by the understanding thereof. And there are some
whose lips are withheld from their ordinary course by the
stupor caused by the contents of their recitation. Some taste
all these thing's and are satisfied and turn away and desist.
Some taste a little from them only, and become puffed up and
isolent and forget.
Some are held back from them by the severe suffering from
their plagues; some by all kinds ofallurements; someby power,
some by glory among men, others by passion for [worldly]
things; some by wanton occupations. Some however advance
I) Cf. Ps. 8.1, II

SIX TRKATISKS (IN TIIK JiKHAVK>UR OF EXCELLENCE 6j
well and making up their mind, they do not turn their back
before they have taken possession ot the pearl.
Begin every work for the sake of God joyfully. And if thou
art pure from affections and from doubt of heart, God will
99 remunerate thee and help thee and give thee wisdom, and
according to Mis will and in a wonderful way He will bring
thee to perfection. To whom be glory and power and adoration
and exaltation for ever and ever. Amen.
Completed are the six treatises on the behaviour
of excellence.
VII
ON OTHER SUBJECTS, CHAPTER BY CHAPTER, IN
SHORT SECTIONS. ON THE CHARACTER OE TRUST
IN GOD AND FOR WHOM IT IS BECOMING TO TRUST
IN GOD. AND FURTHER: WHEN A MAN TRUSTS, HE
WILL HAVE POWER ACCORDING TO [THE STATE
OF] HIS MIND. AND WHO TRUSTS FOOLISHLY AND
WITHOUT DISCERNMENT
There is a trust in God, with a faith of the heart, which is
beautiful and which rises from the discernment of knowledge.
And there is another trust which is insipid and rises from
folly ; and this is false trust.
That a man who has absolutely no care for any of these
passing things and whose soul is night and day given to the
works of God, without thought of any work of this world
because of his great zeal for exellence and because of his
absorbing anxiety for the divine things, and who, therefore,
neglects to prepare dress and food a — nd to fix and to prepare
a place for his shelter and the like, that such a man trusts
in God that He will prepare —in its due season all he needs
and that He will care for him this is really true trust and
a trust of wisdom. And in truth, for such a man it is also
ioo beautiful to confide in God, because he is His servant, and
he is ladened with thoughts concerning Him and he bears the
weight of His works without needed. And so it is becoming

68 ON OTHER SUUJKCTS, rilAPTKK P,V CIIAPTKR, ETC.
to Him to show care for him, which is distinguished from His
care for the rest of mankind, because he has eminently main
tained in his person the word of our Lord saying: seek the
kingdom of God and His righteousness1 and: Take no thought
)
for your body ~). And if ye care for this, the world will pre-
pare all for you, like as a servant. And as unto a master it
will be obedient unto your words without hesitation, without
thwarting your will in anything.
Therefore, because such a man does not desist on account
of [worldly] causes from standing perpetually before Him, he
will not surrender himself to those things which the body needs.
For he does not care for other things either, but he abstains
from them all equally, be they small or great, be they things
—
of comfort or pleasure an abstention based on fear of God.
So he will find sustenance in a wondrous way, even though
he does not touch any of these things, nor fatigues himself
with them.
Another however, whose heart is wholly buried in the earth
and who constantly eats dust with the serpent without caring
in any way for the things pleasant to God, who fatigues him-
self in every respect by the bodily things and is occupied by
and constantly cares for intercourse and pleasure and luxury,
—
and who has manifold worldly connections, when such a man,
given to such laxity and indifference regarding excellence, from
time to time gets into trouble or want, or the fruits of sin-
fulness disturb him in any way, and [when he] says as follows:
ioi I trust in God, — He will work for me without doubt and He
will comfort me, o fool, till now thou hast not recalled God
but thou hast disdained Him by the laxity of thy works and
His name was slandered among the nations, as the scripture
says. And now thou sayest with a full mouth: I confide in Him
who will help me and care for me. God has well said through
the prophet, scorning such people They seek me daily and
:
delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness
and forsook not the ordinance of their God they ask of me
:
the ordinances ofjustice3 To them belongs the fool who does
).
not even spiritually come near unto God, but, at a time when
the darkness of troubles surrounds him, elevates his hands unto
Him in confidence. That such become wise, requires that they
i) Matthew G,33 2) Matthew 6,25 3) Jos. 58,2

ON OTHIOR Sl'KJKCTS, CllAPTKR 11 Y CHAPTER, liTC 69
be branded several times. For, although they have no works
such as could be a basis for trust in God, yet they have been
thought worthy of chastisement and loaded with mercy, as it
were from [the midstj of their evil works and their indifference
regarding their duties. They should not mislead themselves and,
forgetting the rank of their previous way of life, say : I trust
in God. Such have to be chastised, lest they, though not pos-
sessing works of faith, stretch out their feet in idleness, saying:
I believe that God will give me to eat, as if they were
toiling in the works of God.
Or it may come to pass that some one goes and falls into
a pit through his own folly, and although he has never
thought of God before, he says now: I trust in God, He will
102 deliver me. Err not, thou fool. Trust in God has to be preceded
by works for the sake of God and by the sweat of 1lis service.
If thou believest in God thou doest well. But also faith re-
quires works ; and confidence in Him requires the testimony
of the heart which is born of the toils [for the sake] of ex-
cellence. Believe that God is He who cares for His creatures
and who is clad with all power. But connect with this faith
the works which suit it. Then He will answer thee. Take no
wind in thy fist, viz. faith without deeds.
If a man travel a road without being conscious of the fact
that there are evil beasts or murderers on it, or the like, how
many times will this universal care of God cause [the dangerj
to pass, by retaining him at the place where he is, for any
cause, till the danger is over, or by some one meeting him
and causing him to return. Or another time, a dangerous
serpent lies on the way, which he has not noticed. If God will
that he be not entangled in evil, the animal will at once make
a sound or leave its place and disappear, or it will creep
farther so that he sees it and is cautious. Thus God will save
him, even if he be not worthy, for motives which God alone
knows, especially for His mercy's sake. Or, another time a
house or a wall or a rock is on the point of falling or slipping
from its place and coming down instantly [at the placej where
103 some men are sitting. Thereupon God will order an angel
and will hinder this accident and prevent it till those people
have risen [and left] that place, for any reason whatsoever that
makes them go away, so that none will remain under [the
falling thing]. But as soon as they have left [the place], it will

/O ON OTI1KR SUHJKCTS, CHATTER IJY CHATTER, ETC.
fall. But if it happens that anyone be under it, he will not be
damaged. By this God desires to show the greatness of His
power.
Such things and the like are [signs of universal care. The
j
righteous possesses this grace perpetually as an individual,
;
not l ) as a member of the community. The rest, however, are
ordered by God to govern themselves with insight and to
mingle in their affairs intelligence with the care of God. But
the righteous does not need this insight in order to govern
with it his affairs. In stead of this insight he possesses faith
by which he storms strong fortresses. And such things as we
have enumerated he does not fear. As scripture says: the
righteous is bald as a lion '-) and he ventures all through his
faith. Not as one who tempts God but as one who possesses
confidence in Him and as one who is armed and strongly clad
with the force of the spirit. And concerning His great perpe-
tual care for him God has said thus: I will be with him in
trouble ; I will deliver him and honour him. With long life
I will satisfy him, and shew him my salvation 3 ). He who is
104 weak in his works and lax or negligent, or whose deeds are
evil, it is impossible that this hope be his. But it will be for
him that is constantly with God in all things and who is His
relative by his beautiful works, who directs constantly the gaze
of his heart towards God's grace, as David says : My eyes fail
while I wait for the Lord M.
VIII
WHAT IT IS THAT HELPS A MAN TO COME NEAR
UNTO GOD WITH HIS HEART AND WHY IT IS THAT
HELP COMES NEAR UNTO HIM SECRETLY AND
WHAT IT IS THAT CAUSES A MAN TO COME NEAR
UNTO HUMILITY
Blessed is the man who knows his weakness. This know-
ledge becomes for him the foundation and the beginning [of
his comintrl unto all eood and beautiful things. When a man
1) Lacking in one of the T.omlon M>s. 2) I'roverbs 28,I
3) Ps - 91, 15 4) CT. J's. 119, 123

WHAT IT IS THAT IirCU'S A MAX TO COMK NKAR F.TC. /I
knows and perceives that he really and in truth is weak, then
he restrains his soul from profuseness which is dissipation of
knowledge and he will augment the watchfulness of his soul.
Unless a man has been remiss in some small thing and a
slight negligence has appeared in him and tempters have sur-
rounded him either with temptations that arouse bodily affections
or with temptations which stir the affectable power of the soul,
he cannot perceive his own weakness, Then, however, he re-
cognizes the greatness of God's help by comparing it with his
own weakness.
Thus if he sees that his heart does not rest from fear, even
though he be provident and very cautious, withdrawing and
105 hiding his soul in innumerable apartments and providing his
soul with causes of trust, then he understands and knows that
this whole impulse of his heart denotes some other thing which
is lacking and which is very necessary to him, viz. that he
needs other help. For the heart testifies to [this] within, by the
fear that moves in it, denoting the lack of something. And
therefore he cannot remain in confidence. For the help of God
is necessary for deliverance.
When he knows that he needs divine help, he will frequently
pray. And by much beseeching the heart becomes humble, tor
there is no man who is needy and asking, without being humble.
And God will not despise a broken and contrite heart ! ). Until
the heart has become humble, it will not rest from distraction.
Humility restrains the heart. And as soon as man has become
humble, mercy will surround and envelop him. And when mercy
draws near, the heart will perceive help at once, because some
confidence and force will also move in it. When it perceives
that divine help approach unto it and that He is its support
and its helper, then the heart will be filled with faith at once.
Then it will see and understand that prayer is the port of
help, the fountain of salvation, the treasure of confidence, the
sheet-anchor amidst the storms, the light in the darkness, the
stick of the weak, the shelter at the time of temptations, the
medicine at the time of illness, the shield of protection in the
battle, the sharp arrow against the enemies.
106 And because by prayer he has found the entrance unto all
this good, he will delight in prayer of faith for ever more,
1) l>s. si, 17

J2 WHAT IT IS THAT HULL'S A MAN TO COMK NliAU l'TC.
while his heart exults in confidence, not blindly and with
words only, as it had been till then.
When he knows this, he possesses prayer as a treasure
within his soul. And from joy he changes the tenor of prayer
into sounds of thanksgiving. And the following" word has been
said by the sage among the saints, Mar Euagrius, who did
every thing which he did with a purpose Prayer is a joy-
:
that gives place to thanksgivings. Concerning this prayer,
which takes place after receiving the knowledge of God, he
says : This prayer that gives place [to thanksgiving], in which
a man does not pray nor act as in the other passionate prayers
which he prayed, perceiving grace, consists therein that in the
heart, which is filled with joy and ecstasy, frequently emotions
of thanksgivings and gratitude stir themselves, in the silence
of kneelings. Then, on account of the inner ardour, which is
set in motion by wonder at the understanding ofGod's bounties,
he will of a sudden raise up his voice and praise without being
wearied, while the inner ardour gives place to thanksgivings
also of the tongue and so he will give utterance [to his feelings|
;
long and wonderfully. Who has experienced these things clearly,
not dimly, and has noted them with intelligence, will under-
stand when I say that it occurs without variation, for it has
been experienced many times. And furthermore [such a man]
107 will leave idle things and be constantly with God, without a
break, in constant prayer, fearing that he will be bereft of the
current of its helping forces.
All these beautiful things are born from a man's perceiving
his own weakness. For from this, because of his longing for
help, he turns to God with beseechings. And as he brings near
his spirit unto God, Me comes nigh unto him with His gifts.
And He does not take away from him His inspiration, because
of his great humility. For as a widow unto the judge, he
cries at all times avenge me on my adversary. Therefore God,
:
the merciful, necessarily will delay his petitions, that he have
the better reason to approach unto Him. And because of his
need he will constantly remain at the fountain of help, while
God grants some of his demands quickly, others not: [He
grants] those concerning which He knows that they are neces-
sary for life, the rest He delays. And in some cases He with-
holds from him the ardour of his enemies, and in others He
gives an opening to temptations, that this, as I have said,

WHAT IT IS THAI' 11KIT'S A MAN TO ('l)MK NT'.AR KTC. 73
should be a cause for approaching unto God, and that he
should become prudent by temptations. And this is what is
said in the scripture The Lord left many peoples and He
:
did not destroy them at once, nor did He give them into the
hand of Joshua, in order to test Israel by them so that the
generations of the children of Israel should learn war l ).
10<s As for the righteous who is not acquainted with his weak-
ness, all his affairs are in peril. He is not far from falling,
the destroying lion is not removed from him nor the demon of
haughtiness. Who lacks knowledge of his weakness lacks
,
Who Who
humility. lacks humility, lacks perfection. lacks
perfection is still in a state of peril. And the enemy can attack
him at every quarter, because his town is not fortified with
iron bolts nor with a brazen lintel.
Neither is humility to be acquired except through the causes
which bring about a continually broken heart and destroy the
deliberations of presumption. Without humility the service of
man cannot be sealed the seal of the spirit has not yet been
:
placed on the charter of his freedom, he is still a slave and
his service cannot be established without his being made humble,
neither can he acquire wisdom without temptations, neither can
he reach humility without wisdom. Therefore God necessarily
sends the saints things which cause humility and brokenness
of heart and passionate prayer without distraction. Sometimes
he afflicts them by accidents that arise from the natural affec-
tions or by transgressions arising from impure deliberations;
sometimes by disdain or by idle oppressions which they have to
endure from men, or by bodily pains; sometimes by poverty
or need of necessary things sometimes by vehement affections
;
109 of fear in the open war of the demons which He allows in
order to keep them continually in motion, or by terrible varying
states of which one is still more strong and sorrowful and
hard than the other.
All these things happen, that man should have a reason
for being humble, lest he should sleep in neglect either of
things present from which the struggler suffers, or of fear of
things to be. Therefore temptations will necessarily be profi-
table unto men. Now I do not say, that, in order to have a
cause of humility, he ought to let loose his will unto evil
1) Cf. Ju.lgcs 3, I sq.

74 WHAT IT IS THAT IIKLPS A MAN TO COME NEAR KTC.
things, with the purpose of humbling himself by the recollec-
tion of them, or that he should hasten unto other temptations.
But it is beautiful for him that, apart from his performing good
works, he should constantly spur himself and remember that
he is a creature and naturally prone to be seduced. And who-
soever is a creature, requires an external power, viz. to help
him. And he who requires external help, the deficiency of his
own nature is manifest. And every one who knows that he is
deficient, to him humility is becoming in order to receive what
he needs from Him who is able to give it.
If he knows all these things from the beginning and looks
to them at all times, he will not sleep. And if he does not
sleep, he will not be delivered into the hand of the powers
which endanger his vigilance. Therefore it is becoming for him
no that goes the way of God, that he confess and reproach and
rebuke his soul for all [evils] that overtake him, knowing that
either because of his negligence it is excited by the tempter
by order of the Governor, or because he has exalted himself.
Therefore he shall not leap up nor be shaken, but keep his
sold quiet without accusation [of GodJ, lest his evil be doubled.
For there is not iniquity with God, on the contrary, He is
the fountain of justice.
IX
ON SINS [COMMITTED] INTENTIONALLY AND WITH
EVIL WILL AND ON THOSE [COMMITTED] ACCI-
DENTALLY
There are sins in which a man is entangled through weak-
ness and accidentally. And there are sins the source of which
is the will others [spring] from an uncultivated mind. Some
;
are committed occasionally, others continually others are cus-
;
tomary. And all these classes and kinds of sins, though bound
by the common verdict of reprehension, have a different cha-
racter and their punishment may be greater or smaller.
Some sins are reprehended severely others arc near to mercy.
•,
God has also shown unto Adam, Eve and the serpent, though
not one of them was exempted from receiving the retribution
of his fault, a great variety in the curse which was directed

ON SINS [COMMITTKD] INTKNTI.ONA1J.Y AND WITH I'lTC. 75
against each one of them and so He did in the curses directed
;
against their offspring. In accordance with the propensity and
inclination of each unto sin, is judgment made more heavy,
in If any one be not inclined to follow sin, but he be drawn
towards it on account of neglect regarding righteousness, al-
though he be not zealous for it, his judgment will be severe
even if the connection with sin be difficult for him. But if he
be diligent and temptations rise, mercy is near to purify him,
without doubt. For it is another thing that a man who is
careful regarding excellence and constant in its works, medi-
tating on it even in the night, should fail in any of its duties;
while by day he is loaded with its burden and goe — s around
with it, all his thoughts concentrated upon justness it is a
different thing that, while he is occupied with such things,
through ignorance or the compulsion of opposition on the way
of excellence and the mighty waves that arise every moment
in his limbs, and the propensity towards aberration which is
implanted in him as a test of freedom, the indicator of his
scale should point somewhat to the left, and through the sick-
ness of the flesh he should be entangled in any kind of sin
and suffer and be sorry on account of it and bewail himself
passionately because of his miserable weakness in the face of
what overtakes him now and then.
It is a very different thing, that one being lax in the works
of righteousness or wholly neglectful of the way, should run
like a slave in complete obedience to all the delights of sin,
and try to find the means of its accomplishment and that like
;
112 a slave he should purpose zealously to perform the will of his
adversary, his limbs serving him as weapons on behalf of
Satan in complete obedience and that he should not even
think of repentance so as to draw nearer unto excellence and
end his path of shortcomings.
Different are the trespasses and the stumbling-blocks laid on
the way of virtue and in the course of righteousness. As the
rathers say: On the way of excellence there are stumbling-
blocks, there are varying states, there is compulsion, and the like.
A
different thing Js death of the soul and complete destruc-
tion and total abandonment. This is known thereby that, al-
though one falls, he docs not forget the love of his Father
-,
and although he is loaded with trespasses of every kind, his
zeal for the service of good is not held back, nor docs he

76 ON SINS [cOMMITTi;i>| INTKNT[ONAI ,1.A' AND WITH KTC.
desist from his course, nor abhor to stand in stiwgfle against
these things anew and with the same chance of being van-
quished, nor cease from demolishing every day his building
and beginning a [new] foundation.
And the word of the prophet is in his mouth : Till the hour
of my departure from this world, rejoice not against me, O
mine enemy : when I fall, I shall arise ; when I sit in darkness,
the Lord shall be a light unto me r ). And he will not cease
to struggle till death. He will not allow himself to be van-
quished, as long as there is breath in his nostrils. And though
his ship is wrecked every day and the sweat of his commerce
becomes a prey to the depths, he does not cease to borrow
and fit out ships and navigate with good hope; till the Lord,
seeing his zeal, has mercy for his shipwrecks and inclines unto
*3 him in compassion and gives him strong impulses towards
patience and towards braving the burning arrows of the Evil
one. This is wisdom from God and whoever is sick in this
way, is wise.
To abandon hope profits not. It is more expedient for us
to be judged on account of special [sins] than on account of
complete abandonment. Therefore the blessed commentator2
)
warns us against becoming weary in face of the many struggles
and the frequent various kinds of strife to be met on the way
of righteousness lest we should turn back and give our adver-
sary the opportunity of a complete victory in any kind of evil.
And so the blessed commentator says, arranging the strugglers
as it were in classes: If you are truly zealous to look towards
excellence and anxious for serenity of mind unto God, and
to practise those things which are agreeable unto Him, you
must necessarily bear for the sake of these things, all the
struggles which will arise continually against you on account
of the natural affections and the attractions of this world and
the evil of the demons, without relaxing in spite of the constant
and never ceasing strife, without fear of the tenacious vehe-
mence of war, without dread of the hosts of enemies, and
without dejection if it happen that you trespass somewhere
and sin, but receiving on your faces the blows and wounds
such as are [to be expected] in so great a war. On account
of these things, therefore, you must not let yourself be moved
l) Micali 7,8 2) Theodore of Monsuesthi

ON SrNS [COMMITTED] INTENTIONALEY ANM) WITH ETC /7
even from your will's decision on the contrary you must main-
;
tain the choice of your behaviour, deeming it a beloved and
,x4 glorious thing to show yourselves in the war besmeared with the
blood of your blows, without pausing in the slightest degree
from strife against the enemies. These are the warnings of the
blessed commentator.
1hus, it is not becoming in us to relax because of these
things. Woe to the solitary who is unfaithful to his covenant
and, treading down his conscience, gives Satan entrance into
him, in small and great matters of sin, so that he does not
find strength to defend against the enemies the breach [Satan]
has made in his soul. And with what countenance will he behold
the chaste, his companions, when they are brought together
from whom he has separated his way to go the way of des-
truction, and the freedom of speech with God which the pious
possess, and the prayer which arises from the chaste heart
towards God and uplifts itself and even passes the hosts of
the angels and stops not until it reaches God's majesty, holding
the keys in its hands ceasing not until it has acquired its
demand, rehiring unto the mouth that has sent it, with glad-
ness. [And with what countenance will he look upon] what is
harder than all these things, viz. that, as he has separated his
way from them here, so Christ will separate him from them on
that day. When the brilliant clouds will bear on their backs1
)
the bodies that have become splendid by purification and that
enter the great gate of heaven. Therefore the ungodly shall
not stand in the judgment -), because their work is already
judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous 2
),
in the resurrection before the judgment, nor the impure in the
ranks of the saints.
i) I.ittcrally: hip:
2) !>,. 1,5

X
"5 ON THE WORDS OF THE SCRIPTURES BEING SPOKEN
AS IT WERE TO PATIENTS IN MODERATION LEST
THEY SHOULD WHOLLYAHAN D< )N THE LIVING GOD.
BUT THIS SHOULD NOT BE TAKEN BY US AS A
REASON FOR GREATER FREEDOM REGARDING SIN
The encouragement which our Fathers give us in their
writings and the help towards repentance which is in the
writings of the Prophets and the Apostles, should not be taken
by us as a reason to disregard the threats of the divine acts
of judgment, nor the punishment which God has decreed firmly
against the trangression of the borders which should not be
passed, through the mouth of all His saints and by means of
all kinds of laws, in order to eradicate sins. As if the hope of
repentance could be reason for us to strip from ourselves the
feeling of fear in order to sin more freely and without dread.
These [threats] are confirmed by the seals of the word ofGod,
in all the scriptures of our salvation, and by the [divine] decrees
fixed against them, [threatening] all kinds of terror. Some of
these He has partly revealed to the many or to the few [people]
by the punishments Fie brought upon them in order to show
that He hated sin. Or why then were drowned in the Deluge
the generations of the days of Noah? Was it not on account
of the vileness of lasciviousness, because they had violated the
n6 beauty of the daughters of Kainr In that time there was no
love of money nor adoration of idols, nor sorcery, nor wars
waged [by men] against one another.
Or again, why were five towns of the Sodomites for ever
burnt? Was it not because they had given way to lust of the
flesh, which had taken possession of them according to its
good pleasure, consisting in all kinds of impurity? Was it not
because of the fornication of one man that in Israel, the first-
born of God, there fell twenty-five thousand by the plague in
an instant? Why then was Simson rejected by God, Simson,
the man of strength, the Naziraean from the womb, the sanc-
tified to God, whose birth was annunciated by an angel like
that of John the son of Zecharia, through whose hand [God]
wrought marvels and signs, and who by the supernatural strength

ON TIIK WORDS OK Till', SCRII'TURKS liKIN'O SPOKEN ETC. /O
which God infused into his body smote a thousand men with
the jawbone of an ass and became a saviour and a judge
unto Israel? Was it not because he made impure and defiled
his hallowed limbs by intercourse with a harlot, that the Lord
left him and gave him into the hands of his enemies? David,
the heart of God, for whose excellence the promise made unto
the righteous Fathers was carried out in his offsprin — g from
whom sprouted Christ the Saviour of the whole world was
it not by adultery with one woman and for the feebleness of
one moment that from a glance of his eye he got an arrow
in his soul and wrought evil against himself from within his
own house for the son which was to come forth from his loins
;
was to pursue him ?
And this happened although he showed repentance and the
117 Lord said to him: Also have I put away thy sin; thou shalt
not die ; and he wept a flood of tears so that he moistened
),
his bed during' the nights.
I return to what I was saying before : Why then did distress
and destruction hit the house of Eli the priest, the righteous
old man, a priest and a judge of Israel during forty years."
Was it not because of Pinehas and Hophni his sons who treated
the women scornfully that came to pray in the tabernacle,
though he himself did not sin, at any rate not wilfully, but
only in so far as he was silent and reprehended with words
only, without showing fervour against the fornication of his
sons, so that the judgment of the Lord took revenge on them t
And lest any one should think that the Lord shows His zeal
only against those who are sinners in their lifetime, He also
displays it against this audacious sin hated of Him, in the
case of those who are near to Him, Llis priests and judges
and the heads of the people and against those men who were
holy unto Him and by whose hands He had clone wonderful
things, yet whom, when they violated the laws He had laid
down, He did not spare. As is written in Ezechiel where He
says to the man whom Lie orders to smite the people of
Jerusalem with a hidden sword: Begin before my altar and do
not spare, neither old man nor boy nor youth 2 to show that
) ;
it was the people near to Him, those who walked in fear
118 and chastity before Him and performed His will. The saints
1) Of. 2 Samuel 12, 13 2) Ezcliicl 9,6

8() ON Till': WORDS OK TIIK S< RIITl'RKS BF.rXO Sl'OKRX ETC.
of the Lord and those near to Him are good works and a
pure heart. But when they reject the ways of the Lord's will,
Me also rejects them and puts them away from before Him
and takes His grace from them.
And why then did the judgment of the Exalted smite
Belshazzar by the sign of the hollow hand? Was it not be-
cause he had behaved audaciously against the holy vessels
which he had taken from Jerusalem and in which he drank
with his concubines? And in the same way the judgment of
the Exalted will of a sudden smite him who in abandoned
audaciousness uses for worldly purposes the limbs that once
were set apart for the holiness of the Lord, just as Belshazzar
was smitten who behaved audaciously against the holy vessels
taken from the sanctuary of the Lord.
Therefore we should not make use of the confidence in
repentance and the heart-giving words of the scriptures as a
motive for disregarding the words and the threats of the
Lord and disdain Him by evil deeds, disdaining thereby also
the limbs that once we have offered as a sacrifice for the
ministration of His sanctuaries and for the use of His service.
Verily we are the sanctified of the Lord and the Naziraeans
abstaining from women, as Elijah, Elisha and the prophets
and the other sanctified Naziraeans and holy virgins by whose
hands great and amazing things were done, who spake with
God face to face and as those who lived afterwards, John
;
the virgin and the holy Simeon and the other preachers of
119 the New Testament who sanctified themselves to the Lord and
received mystic secrets from Him, some from His own mouth,
others by revelation. And so they became mediators between
God and mankind, and the "receptacles of His revelations and
the preachers of the Kingdom to the inhabitants of the world.
XI
WHEREBY THE BEAUTY OF SOLITARY LIFE IS TO
BE PRESERVED AND HOW IT CAN BE A CAUSE OF
GOD'S BEING GLORIFIED
It is becoming for the solitary to be in every way a vision
of stimulation unto those who look at him, so that because of
the beauties which radiate from him on all sides as the rays

WHEkElsV TllE liEAUTV OE SOLITARY LIKE IS TO l!E ETC 8I
of the sun, even the enemies of truth unwillingly acknowledge
that the Christians have a well-founded hope and from every
;
side they will flow to their place of refuge, and thus the head
of the church will be elevated above its enemies.
Thus the glory of the solitary's deeds will be a stimulus for
many to withdraw from the world. And [it is becoming] that
he be reverenced by every one on account of his excellence,
so that the mouth of the members of the church will be opened
on his account and their head exalted above all creeds.
The pride of Christ's church consists in the behaviour of
the solitaries. Therefore it is becoming to the solitary that the
beauties of his habits shine on all sides-, in the humble attitude
of his limbs, in the simplicity o( his habit, in his elevation
120 above visible things, in the veracity of his renunciation, in his
rigorous fasting, in his being continuous silent, in the subduing
of his senses, in the continence of his aspect, in his not being
quarrelsome with other people for any reason, in the sparing-
ness of his speech, in his being pure from rancour, in his
discriminate conscious simplicity. And [it is becoming for him]
that it be known that he is alien to this harmful and fleeting
life and near to true and spiritual life, from his constantly
being bv himself, from his bein^ unknown among men, from
his not being tied to any ona by the bonds of comradeship
and intimacy, from his quiet dwellingplace, from the small
space of his habitation, from his few and mean utensils, from
his avoiding men, from his constant prayer, from his hating
and avoiding honour, from his not being bound by temporal
life, from his great patience, from his endurance in temptations,
from his keeping aloof from rumours and from inquiries into
worldly affairs, from his constant care for and meditation upon
his true country, known by his sad countenance and his shri-
velled face 1 from his constantly weeping night and day, and
),
above all from his cautious chastity and his freedom from
covetousness in small and great things.
These are, in short, the manifest beauties of the solitary
121 which testify to his being wholly dead to the world and near
unto God.
It is becoming for him to think of these things constantly
in order to acquire them.
Verli. AM. UtU-rk. !.,;-• iWcir-ln.V.

82 WHKRKTJY THE BEAUTY OF SOLITARY LIFK IS TO P.E ETC.
If any one asks Wherefore are these lengthy descriptions
:
necessary? I answer: they are very necessary. For if any one
search for them, one by one, in himself, and if any fail him
who cares for his life, he can ascertain from these distinctions
his deficiency in any of the virtues. And thus these descriptions
may become to him admonitions. And if he possess perso-
nally all the things described and also those omitted, the know-
ledge of them is given him [in this way] and so he will be-
come a cause of God being praised among men and angels.
And then he may prepare for his soul a place of rest before
departing this world.
XII
THAT IT IS NOT BEAUTIFUL FOR THE SERVANT OF
GOD WHO HAS RENUNCIATED THE WORLD AND
HAS GONE FORTH TO SEEK EVEN THE TRUTH,
OUT OF FEAR THAT HE SHALL NOT FIND THE
TRUTH TO DESIST FROM SEEKING IT OR FROM
THE FERVOUR WHICH IS BORN FROM THE DESIRE
OF DIVINE THINGS, OR FROM THE INQUIRY AFTER
THEIR MYSTIC SECRETS WHICH ARE DESCRIBED
MYSTERIOUSLY. THAT, BY THIS SEEKING, THE MIND
MAY DESIST FROM EVIL DISTRACTION AND RE-
COLLECTIONS OF THE AFFECTIONS
There are three degrees which constitute the whole course
of man. The degree of novitiate, the middle one, and that of
perfection.
And although the mind of the first degree looks with all
its occupations and recollections towards excellence, yet it is
connected with the affections.
The second degree, the middle one, lies between the affec-
table and the spiritual state. Righthand and lefthand delibera-
tions arc stirred equally in it. And neither the fountain of
light nor that of darkness ever cease to flow on its side, as
it has been said. If the [solitary] cease for even a short time
from meditating restlessly on spiritual writings, or from thinking
of divine things, such as enflanie him as lire by their tending
towards the truth, in union with outward needfulness as strict

THAT TT "IS NOT r.KAUTIl'UI, FOR Tilt-: SERVANT OK ETC. 83
as possible which includes inward cautiousness and sufficient
—
works then he is swept away towards the side of the af-
fections.
But if he heighten his natural warmth in the way mentioned,
without desisting from seeking and inquiring, and if he follow
these things from afar without seeing them, except their desig-
nation in the scriptures, and if he multiply his deliberations
and dominate them by those which do not decline unto the
left side, and receive not any seed of phantasies coming from
the demons instead of from truth, but be desirous on the con-
trary, long and g — uard himself and beseech God in passionate,
enduring prayer then, as soon as it will please God to give
it, He will open His gate before him. Especially on account
of his humility, for to the humble the mysteries are revealed.
If he dies, however, in that expectation, without having seen
that country at a short distance, I think that his heritage will
be with the ancient righteous, wdio have expected perfection,
according to the word of the Apostle, but have not seen it x ),
t23 yet have worked in expectation of it all their lifetime and have
departed. But what shall we say, if any one does not reach
[the degree which enables him] to enter the promised land
which is the stage of the perfect and to find truth eye to eye
in so far as nature is capable of this? Shall he then resign
this [and remain] on that low stage which is wholly connected
with that of the left side? And because he has not found the
whole truth, shall he remain in this low state which does not
even know to desire these tliiiiLrs, or shall he elevate himself
unto the middle stage mentioned, even though he does not
look as it were in a mirror, but expects it from afar, and in
that expectation will be gathered unto his fathers?
Even though he is not deemed worthy of the fulness of that
grace here, yet he shall occupy his mind through intercourse
with it at a distance and by its stimulating influence during
his lifetime he shall eliminate and fly from bad deliberations.
And in this hope, his heart being full of God, he shall depart
this world.
All that takes place in humility, is beautiful. The uncor-
poreal thoughts of the mind inclining towards the love of God
[engendered] by the understanding of the scriptures, are a
—
1) Cf. I Peter 1.10 12

84 <)iV '1'HK VARYING STATKS Willi If COMli TO TlIOSK KTC.
fence for the gates of the soul against foreign deliberations.
They guard the spirit by ardent recollections of future things,
against its being distracted through idleness to the recollection
of [worldly] things this would quench the ardour of its emo-
;
tion and it would fall into desires.
XIII
ON THE VARYING STATES WHICH COME TO THOSE
1,4
WHO EIVE IN SOLITUDE, AS IS JUSTLY ORDERED
BY GOD CONCERNING THIS [SPIRITUAL] WAY: NOW
SADNESS AND PSYCHIC SUFFOCATION, THEN, SUD-
DENLY, GLADNESS AND JOY AND HOT FERVOUR
AND UNUSUAL STRENGTH. PRAISE TO HIM THAT
HAS ORDERED OUR WAY AMEN
To him who has determined to order his being in lonely
dwelling and to pass the remainder of his clays in service and
in the ordering of the way of solitude, it will come to pass
that, while he is as usual, in solitude, such as is justly pres-
cribed by divine grace, his soul will be hidden in darkness. And
just as the radiance of the sun is hidden from the earth by-
thick clouds, so, for a short time he is bereft from spiritual
consolation and from the rays of grace, by the clouds of the
affections; and some of the joy-giving force is withdrawn from
him, while an unusual darkness falls upon his spirit yet his mind
;
is not troubled nor inclined towards dejection but he remains
;
patient, occupying himself with the writings of divine men and
with prayers to which he forces himself, looking for help.
Then of a sudden it will be given him unexpectedly x ). l;or,
as the face of the earth is gladdened by the rays of the sun
when the dense atmosphere is torn asunder, so the words of
prayer are able to tear away and to remove from the soul the
,25 dark cloud of the affections and to gladden and to illuminate
the spirit by the rays of joy and consolation which is born in
our deliberations.
Especially when the soul is able to have recourse to the
profit from the holy books and from vigils that make the mind
pure. Constant meditation upon the holy scriptures will perpe-
tually fill the soul with incomprehensible ecstasy and joy in God.
1) [.irenilly: though lit; dues not kru.nr it.

AS TO WIIKN TIloSK WHO L1VK IN SoUTUD!', KTC. 85
XIV
AS TO WHEN THOSE WHO LIVE IN SOLITUDE BEGIN
TO KNOW, EVEN TO A SLIGHT EXTENT, HOW FAR
THEY HAVE ADVANCED IN THEIR SERVICE IX THE
UNFATHOMABLE SEA OF SOLITARY LIFE SO THAT
THEY ARE ABLE TO HAVE CONFIDENCE SOME-
WHAT ON THEIR LABOURS THAT THEY BEGIN TO
BEAR FRUIT
I shall tell thee a thing at which thou must not laugh; for
I tell the truth. Do not doubt it, for those from whom I have
received it, are trustworthy.
If thou hangest on they eyelids before God, do not think
that in behaviour thou hast reached anything till tears come
forth ; for thy hidden being still ministers unto the world. This
means, that thou art on the same stage of behaviour with
faithful lay people. For thou workest with thy outward man
in the service of God but the inward man is still without fruits.
His fruits begin at the point which I have indicated. When
thou hast reached the place of tears, then understand that the
spirit has left the prison of this world and set its foot on the
way towards the new world. Then it begins to breathe the
126 wonderful air which is there, and to spend tears. For now the
throes caused by the spiritual child, become vehement. And
grace, the common mother, hastily delivers, as it were, the
soul, God's image, unto the light of the world to-come. And
when the time of birth is come, then the mind will perceive
a something belonging to that world, like a faint perfume,
which the child has received in the members into which it
has grown.
But he who does not patiently bear what is unusual, will
move his body with weeping mingled with joy which excels
the sweetness of honey. Together with the growing of the
child within there will be an increase of tears. The stream of
tears begins when the spirit begins to become serene. I mean
the flowing of tears belonging to the stage which I have
described, not that partial one, which takes place from time
to time.

;
86 AS TO WILKN THOSE WHO LIVE IX SOLITUDE ETO.
This consolation which takes place from time to time, will
come to pass to every one who serves God in solitude. Some-
times during spiritual contemplation. Sometimes when hearing
or reading the words of the scriptures. Sometimes while occu-
pied with beseechings.
But I propose to speak of that complete one, which con-
tinues night and clay without a break, and which comes to
him who has found truth in solitude by the sincerity of his
behaviour, when the eyes become fountains ofwater for a period
of nearly two years. This happens during a transition-period
I mean symbolical transition 1 ). At the end of the period of
tears thou wilt reach peace of deliberations and by this peace
;
of deliberations thou wilt reach the divine rest of which Paul
speaks, rest in part, according to [our] nature.
From the beginning of [this period of] rest onward, the mind
127 will see hidden things. Then the Holy Ghost will begin to
reveal unto it heavenly things, while (rod dwells in thee and
promotes spiritual fruits in thee. Then thou wilt perceive the
state which the whole nature will receive in the renewal of all
things, dimly and mysteriously.
This I have written to the profit of myself and of every-
one who comes across this book, being that which 1 have
attained by contemplation of the scriptures and from the mouth
of veracious men (and to a small part by experience) that I
also may gain profit by the prayers of those who have gained
profit from these things, because I have toiled upon them.
Listen also to another thing which I tell thee, as I have
heard it from a mouth that does not lie : As soon as thou
hast entered this place where the deliberations are set at peace,
then the violence of weeping is again taken from thee and
thou readiest the state of moderation.
This is the exact truth in a few words; and it is true and
confirmed by the whole church, by the excellent among her
sons and by her chief protagonists.
1) rtf£\*l\ir<' r^in^rsa

[
ox -nil': couusii of tiii: solitary' (.wkklk, ktc. ^7
XV
ON THE COURSE OF THE SOLITARY CAREER, SUC-
CINCTLY AND WITHOUT PROLIXITY. AND ON THE
OUES'ITON HOW AND AT WHAT TIME ITS VIRTUES
ARE HORN ONE FROM THK OTHER
Lucidly and distinctly, the course of virtues shows itself so.
Erom works performed by compulsion, in solitude there is
12S born a blazing- and immeasurable heat, which is generated in
the heart by fervent deliberations, newly born in the spirit.
Works and watchfulness polish the mind by their heat and
idve it siidit. And si<dit gives birth to the fervent deliberations
mentioned, because of the depth of psychic sight which is
called contemplation.
Contemplation gives birth to fervour; from this fervour sight
given by grace is born and then outbursts of tears begin. At
;
first partial ones; this means that a man's tears will flow
several times every day. Then he will come to [the state of
tears without a break. Through the tears the soul receives
peaceful deliberations. From peaceful deliberations it rises unto
serenity of insight. And by serenity of insight a man reaches
the sight of hidden things. For purity is brought about by
being free from war.
And after these the mind will reach that which is denoted
by the symbol of the brook in Ezekiel the prophet '), a symbol
which contains the type of those three psychic stages which
are near to divine things and of which the third is the utmost
which a man can reach.
The beginning of all these is a good will unto God and
various works in solitude and that uprightness which is born
from severe reclusion from the world.
It is not necessary to enumerate the distinctions between
the works, for they are known to every man. Hut as soon as
any one occupies himself with them it is not possible that he
deteriorate ; I know, on the contrary, that he will profit by
1) K/.. 47

;
88 OX TIIK COUR.SK ill1' TUK SOLITARY CARKKR KTC.
1:9 them. They are the following: the work of hunger, of reciting,
waking during the night, according to every one's strength
frequent prostrations, several times in the day and often during
the night. Some will perform thirty prostrations at one time,
salute (the crossj ') and go away from it. Some will perform
even a greater number. Others will prolong prayer during three
hours and stay in concentration while prostrated, without com-
pulsion and without distraction.
These two varying states show the great richness of grace,
which works in various ways with every man according to his
measure, be it that he multiplies the number [of his prayersj
on account of his fervent ardour, be it that he acquires quiet
in his soul so that he reduces to one the lar<je number of his
former prayers.
As to the question of the cause of that other prayer and
its duration without compulsion, it seems to me that it is not
becoming for us to treat such things in detail, by describing
their nature in speech or writings lest the reader, being unable
to understand anything of it, should judge it to be something
insipid ; or, if he should be acquainted with these things, should
despise him who is not able to cross the border of certain
things. From the one blame, from the other laughter would
be the consequence; and thus I would become a barbarous
writer to such ones, according to the word of the apostle
i;,o concerning him that speaks in prophecies 2 ).
But he who is desirous to know these things should know
that their course has been described above. He may combine
works with deliberation, by the grace of our Lord. And
what practically happens in these states he may experience
personally.
Stay therefore in thy cell and the cell will teach thee every-
thing-.
1) Cf. p. 140
2) Cf. I Cor. 14

iiuw L'Kokh'.\[;i,i<; it is kor tiik sou, wliilk v:vc. ^9
XVI
MOW PROFITABLE IT IS FOR THE SOUL WHILE IN
SOLITUDE TO BE FREE FROM WORKS AND HOW
INTERCOURSE HARMS THE MIND OF THE NOVICE
WHICH HAS BUT LATELY BEGUN TO HAVE INSIGHT
FOR ITSELF AND HOW IT IS CLEAR THAT BODILY
WORKS NECESSARILY BRING ABOUT IN THE SOLI-
TARY A DEFICIENCY IN DIVINE WORKS
That a man who is beset with care, should be quiet and
in a slate of peace, is impossible. I;or the necessary things
which cohere with those things upon which he expends his
labour, cannot but have the effect that lie be shaken ; and
they will bereave him of his rest and quiet. For the only oppor-
tunity for Satan to enter the soul is distraction. Therefore it
is becoming for the solitary to place himself constantly before
God's face and to look for His will *), if it be his intention to
keep his mind in watchfulness and if it be his will grasp
quickly the small deviations as soon as they begin to stir in
him, and, in peace of spirit, learn to recognise what passes
in him ::).
Frequent oscillations are a sign of the solitary's relaxation
as to the preparation of Christ's service, and they are signs
of deficiency in divine things.
Without bein<r free [from cares! thou canst not demand
lucidity from thy soul ; nor rest and quiet if the senses are set
free; nor concentration of the senses when the oscillations of
practice [are frequent
|.
Keep thy self free from accidents then thou wilt find no
;
trouble in thy mind.
Without constant beseechings it is not possible to be near
to God. And to think of other things at the same time with
the work of beseechings, is distraction of the heart.
If fervent emotions befall thee sometimes when thou tastest
God in the hot fire of divine things, but when thou seekest
them again thou lindest them to have become insipid and cold
l) COVwOl 2) I,iU.'r;ilIy: those who go in and out.

90 HOW I'ROEITAULE IT IS FOR THE SOUL WHILE IN ETC.
within thyself, [this is because] the distraction of intercourse
with men has assailed thee somewhere, or because thou hast
estimated bodily work above them, and on account thereof the
fervour of thy deliberations has become cold. Tears, however,
and beating the head [on the ground] during prayer, and
fervent self-humiliations quicken again their warm sweetness in
the heart. And in lauded madness the heart will fly after God,
crying: My soul thirsteth for thee, the living God: when shall
I come and see thy face 1)? He that has tasted this wine and
has been bereft of it, he only knows in what a torment he
has been left and what has been taken from him on account
of his relaxation.
O, how evil is the sight of men and intercourse with them
132 for him that lives in solitude, especially him that is relaxed
and left alone"). Verily, my brethren, as a strong blast of cold,
that suddenly hits the buds of the trees and nips their small
heads germinating from the twigs, so intercourse with men,
even though it be short and in a congregation with a good
purpose, withers the sprouts of the virtues which have but
lately shown their heads because of the good air:i of solitude,
)
and which beset with their humidity the tree ofthe soul, planted
by the brooks of repentance. And as the sharpness of the cold
strikes the new sprouts of the roots, destroying and pushing
back their heads into the earth, so intercourse with men de-
stroys the root of the mind which but begins to grow green
by reason of the herbs of virtues, thrusting them back to
their original place and destroying their tenderness. And if
intercourse with those who are nearly master of themselves is
so obnoxious to the soul, be it only on account of their hinde-
ring the customary service, this must happen to a larger extent
if a man speaks with and sees stupid and uncultivated men or
even lay people, which has the effect of fire upon small wood.
And as the humility of an honourable and estimable man, who
forgets himself frequently by drinking wine, is troubled and his
honour stained and his chastity shaken by the foreign deli-
berations which dominate his spirit on account of the force of
the wine, so the chastity of the soul is shaken by intercourse
•33 with and sight of men and it forgets the aim of its watch-
;
fulness and is bereft of the whole intention of its will ; and
1) Ts. 42,2 2) viz. !>y grace 3) literally: the mixture of the air

HOW PROFITAliLK IT IS FOR Till' SOUL Willi,K IX KTC. yl
intercourse and recreation and the use of luxury eradicate from
its depth the whole foundation of laudable behaviour.
And even if a man be silent and only in the presence of
such men in person, hearing and seeing, the mere fact that the
doors of his eyes and his ears let in [what is seen and heard],
is able to turn his spirit from divine things and to trouble it
greatly.
If thus the mere sight of men and the bare hearing of their
speech for only a small time is able to cause so much harm
to the solitary who is watchful, what then shall we say about
regular meetings or about those of a longer duration?
The vapour rising from the stomach obscures ] the know-
)
ledge of divine things, as the inhalations rising from the damp
earth obscure the face of the sun ~).
Haughtiness does not understand that it proceeds in dark-
ness without knowing insight and wisdom. In its own thoughts
it is elevated above all things, but it is poorer and lower than
any thing. It is unable to know the ways of (rod, and the
Lord will hide His will from it, because it does not like to go
in the way of the humble.
XVII
ON THK SHORT PA HIS TOWARDS COD WHICH ARE
"34
REVEALED TO ONE FROM THE SWEET WORKS IN
VIGILS AND THAT THOSE WHO ARE GIVEN TO
VIGILS ARE SUPPORTED BY HONEY THEIR WHOLE
LIFETIME
Do not think, O man, that among all the works of ascetics
there is any one greater and more profitable than that ofvigils.
In truth, my brethren, if during the day the ascetic is not
distracted by corporeal things and temporal care but cuts
,
himself off somewhat from the world, and is watchful to even
a low degree during vigils, then I do not object to declare
unto you in truth, that soon his spirit will fly as with wings
and ascend unto God to be in delight. And he will easily
look at that glory, and in that knowledge which is higher than
i) In one Ms. only 2) Sec p. S3

Q2 UN THK SHORT PATHS TOWARDS HUH WUlt II Kir.
human spirit he will quickly swim. The solitary who during' his
vigils abides by the discernment of the mind, will no longer
seem to be clad with flesh. Verily, this work belongs to the
class of the angels. And it is impossible that those who appli-
cate themselves to this behaviour, should be left without great
divine gifts, on account of the vigilance and serenity of their
heart, and because their deliberations tend to Him only.
The soul, therefore, which applies itself in its labours to the
duty of vigils, becomes trained, and acquires Cherubs' eyes
in the swiftness and acuteness of their gaze, so that at all
times it gazes on heavenly contemplations.
I am of the opinion that he who on account of vaste know-
ij5 ledge and with discernment has chosen for himself this great
and divine work, and is wholly devoted to bear the load of
the glorious part he has chosen, will necessarily be zealous to
guard himself also during the day against the trouble of occu-
pations and of care for [worldly] things, and that he conse-
quently will not be devoid of wonderful fruits and the great
delight he will gather from them. And I may say deliberately,
without lying, that he who despises this, does not even know
for what purpose he performs all this toil: the loss of sleep,
the many repetitions, the fatigue of the tongue, the standing
on his feet during the whole night, while his mind is not there
where he recites his Psalms and prayers-, but he performs
these works as a matter of custom, as something which is
devoid of discernment. And if this were not as 1 say, how
could he suffer to be bereft of and to remain without reaping
profitable fruits from the constant occupation with his work:
But he strives towards these [results] through the holy occu-
pation of the recitation of the scriptures, which is a fortification
of the mind and, principally, a cause1 of prayer, a helper and
)
a companion of vigils, a light of the mind, a guide on the
way and the seed 2 of manifold contemplation during prayer.
)
It is a check against the distraction of the spirit and against
its occupying itself with idle things. It sows in the soul constant
recollection of God and [of] the ways of the saints who have
pleased Him. And it causes the mind to acquire wisdom and
subtlety.
Wherefore then, () zealous man, doest thou order thy occu-
J) rdxXXX. 2) literally: the sower

.
on Ttti: short I'.vrns towards god vViiu'ii ii'ic:. 93
136 pations in this way, without discernment? For thou showest
care for thyself in that thou standest upon thy feet during- the
whole night, fatiguing thyself with glorifications and Psalms and
prayers. It would be easy for thee, by little watchfulness during
the day, to be made worthy of the divine grace for thy strenuous
efforts in other duties. Wherefore doest thou fatigue thyselfand
sow in the night, whereas during the day thou renderest useless
thy works so as to lose the fruits, dissipating this vigilance
and fervour which thou wouldst acquire by vigils, through the
distraction of intercourse with men and through different occu-
pations, and destroying thy profit by wandering idleness?
If thou wouldst associate to thy nightly meditation, o man,
service during the day without breaking in twain the fervour
of the occupations of the heart, thou wouldst quickly embrace
Jesus' bosom.
And from this thou seest that thou sufferest for lack of
discernment. For thou doest not perceive why vigils are neces-
sary for the ascetic. Thou thinkest it is for the sake of toiling
only, and not in respect of another thing which is expected to
be born from
it.
But he that by grace has almost been made worthy of
understanding that for which the sages hope in combating
sleep and compelling nature to such a degree that during t — he
whole night, awake bodily and mentally, they offer prayers
also knows the strength given by watchfulness during the day
and the profit it grants the spirit in its nightly solitude while
'37 at its vigils with discernment, and the power it supplies over
the deliberations and the purity l and concentration with which
)
it endows the mind, so that without compulsion and strife the
spirit gazes at the greatness of the words [recited]
I say this also, that though the body may fall short in the
work of fasting on account of its great weakness, yet vigils,
by their lonely character, afford the mind steadfastness in prayer,
and enable the heart to recognize spiritual powers by means
of insight. This can only take place if it is not assailed by
any disturbance through relaxation caused by things met during
the day.
Therefore I admonish thee, o man of insight who wishest
to acquire vigilance of mind in (iod and knowledge of the
1) ReaTmj; of some M:>.^,

94 ON THE SHORT PATHS TOWARDS GOD WHICH KTC.
new life, that during thy lifetime thou mayest not despise this
duty l ) of vigils, by which thy eyes will be opened so as to
see the whole glory of ascetic work and the power of the way
of righteousness.
— —
And if it should happen unfortunately that a thought
of relaxation should make its nest in thee, and thou shouldst
think, on account of [previous] experience, that thy usual helper
is training thee and making thee prudent by means of varying
states, such as coldness and heat, or by variety of chance and
occasion, or on account of thy body being ill or weak; and
ifthis should induce thee to forego sleep in the evenin — g, though
thou shouldst not be willing to fatigue thy body then I
beseech thee with love to desist from all this zealous labour,
the reciting of Psalms, the performing of the service, the fre-
ts8 quent kneelings during regular praying. I advice thee to sit
in solitude, awake, if thou art able to do this, without recitation
of Psalms and without prostrations. And if thou art able to
do so, pray with thy heart only. But do not sleep. And by
all means pas — s thy night, sitting, in the usual beautiful medi-
tation. Only do not make thy heart heavy 2 and dark by
)
sleep. Then the old swiftness and force and fervour will be
given thee by grace and thou wilt rejoice and exult and thank
God. P'or such heaviness and coldness 3 are admitted unto
)
man in order to test him.
If a man rouse himself fervently and shake off and cast
away [despondency], compelling himself somewhat, suddenly
grace will approach as before. And another force will impart
itself to him, in which ten thousand [gifts of] grace and profi-
table states are hidden. And man will be astonished while
thinking of the former heaviness and the swiftness and strength
following it, and of how such a state of a sudden has over-
come him.
Therefore he will be prudent henceforth, so that, when this
heaviness comes again at other times, he will recognize it. But
if he had not been daring on former occasions, he would not
have acquired this knowledge.
Thou seest how prudent a man becomes if he rouse himself
a little and if he be valiant at the time of struggle. But when
l-tf'^raO.l 2) Literally : thick
Reading r<'a\C\V»ix3 with the London Ms

™
THK SHORT PATHS TOWARDS GOD IVHIni Kir 95
his nature really subsists only and no longer stru^le but
gr2 Lm '" °"'er P"inl5 S,reD*th '"" a " thi"S= »»' >*
'
" Constant
a b . e ou n s o e t b m rok t e h s n e oli s t o p u r i d r e i , a t ny a wit s c h t a a u t s r e e e . ci o t f I a n t e s i c i o s n g t h a t a s n y b d r ') o , m u o g if d h e t p r e a a r t p b e e o t u u t f a o l o b d y , so w l e o i a t r s u i k d l s e y
.formed m sohtude, will of itself, automatically and suddenlv,
Z bu Z t ffoorthh ^ an T d mo t , W s ° te„ eye t S he a ch k e i e n k d s ° b f y bn th l e " i i r sm p - ro * fuse t n e e a s r s s . which
n oo o ff t w„ t a h t ' e ch,f u ru s l u I al s r o d c hI a ? t r i u v k d f e, i t mp t ' u ' h " l e s " e , v y e o h f b e ° n m a d e t y n u ' t re h , p u a n - s l s b i , o e k n d no o b w f >' f t * o h r e e n n ic a a t s t h c i a e o t t n i , t c h i - o s u m
ait tempted ,„ ,hy spirit by haughtiness. Mix thy food with
•'she., press ; thy belly against the dust and scrutinize what thou
ami st th b y oug se h r t v . .e A e n w d h.c re h co i g s ni a z b e ov t e he th v y ar n y a i t n u g re. sta P t e es rh o a f ps th G y od nature
k ha n v o e w m h e o r w cy upon thee and send thee light so that thou w w i i l l t l
w to be humble, lest thy evil become greater
»» w.ll not desist from carefulness, till repentance dawns
n our heart and we
find humility and our heart finds rest
III ^jO(_I.
XVIII
w \\ or n n* lm ? , v , W0 ° N 'F D H K A H R O V F L E U Y L HE 1 A >E R O U PLE FRO T M HK 0 ' L R 1J '' M «> E l' N S
"KHAVIO'UR. MAY GOD
m4,
I
kb.Sb.mR,VE
US HV THEIR PRAVKRS AMEN
,.,o n
O
a
ne
con
day
.
I we
,
nt
wa
t
s
o
.
t
„
h
_
e
ex
c
i
el
j
l
cct
of
.ns
a h
i|
o
)
l
at
y
^
brot
w
h
o
e
i
r
iW
an^d lay^ do
^
wn
,ods sake. There was nobody in that country [whom knewl
had seen T ,l„s brother several time, at night, as he I stood, a
2 u o u ul U d T r H ect, C e t ^ he " m , ™
d.
-
l.g
"
e
S T
n
U
t
h a
l
e
y
"
.
" y
T
h W
h
e O
e
k
n
W
,
C Ou
o
f l °
f
d r
a
t b
s
h e
u
e S
dd
! " »
en
»
,
» ! i
h
« t
e
b
w
« i
o
' '
u
- rl
l
' ie
d
- r s
l
t
e
a h
a
n
v
a d
e
n
he serv.ee, all on his face, and beat, so to speak a hundred
fn.es, with h,» head on the earth violently and quickly, on
<<*>«=y Ai., rfitnJ, „„,;„„ atliludc rcgariUi,,, |!,jn~s

:
L)6 TIltNliS Ullk'li I IlAVK HKAKl) l-'Kn.\f 01,1) MK.V KTC.
account of the fervour which grace had kindled in his heart.
Thereupon he would rise and salute the cross. Then again he
prostrated himself, rose, saluted the cross and again fell down
on his face. This he repeated so many times that I was not
able to count them. Who could have counted the many kneelings
which that brother performed these nights?
He would also approach the- cross and kiss it twenty times,
full of reverence and of fervour, in love mingled with fear;
thereafter he continued his reciting of Psalms. From time to
time, when he was no longer able to bear that flame of joy,
he was suddenly overwhelmed by frequent currents of delibera-
tions, which kindled him with their fervour and he would
;
elevate his voice because he could not restrain himself.
And I was astonished at the grace which was with that brother
and I wondered at his zeal and alacrity in the works of God.
141 After the morning service, when he sat down for recitation,
he was like one in the state of rapture. At every verse he
recited he would fall on his face several times ; and at many
of the words he would stretch his hands towards heaven and
utter the glorification several times.
He was a man of middle age, nearly forty years old. He
ate but little his temperament was dry and hot. And because
;
he compelled himself, when his body could not bear it, he
looked like a shadow from time to time, so that one pitied
him on account of his thin face, which was vanishing and be-
coming as small as two fingers. Several times I said to him
moderate this strict rule of behaviour, my brother, and this
beautiful way which thou treadest and do not disorder nor
break thy rule as a spiritual chain, out of desire to add a
small quantity of works with the result that thy whole course
will be brought to a close. Eat moderately, but eat regularly.
And make not thy way too long for thy strength, lest thou
shouldst have to desist from it wholly.
Further he was compassionate and very bashful he was glad
,
to show compassion. He was honest by nature and easily per-
suaded, and prudent in God. Because of his honesty and joyous
disposition he was liked by every one and they all loved him.
He worked with all the brethren in clay in their cells, when
M2 they had any, now for three, now for four days
;
every evening
he returned to his own cell, til! the work of the brother was
finished. He was very well skilled in this work.

THINGS WHICH I HAVE IIF.ARD FROM OLD MKN ETC. 97
If he possessed any thing, and one of the brethren begged
him to give it him, he gave it him even though he was in
great need of it ] ). He was very sensitive before all sorts of
persons and was not able to say : I have not, or : I want it
myself. And that he regularly left his cell to work with the
brethren, was because of his sensitiveness before others; so he
compelled himself, although not inclined to go out. And several
times he spoke to me about his aversion to leave his cell.
This was the divine behaviour of that wonderful brother.
Concerning another solitary 3 ). Once I went to the
cell of an old solitary, an excellent man who loved me greatly.
He was somewhat quaint in his words, but illuminated in his
thoughts and profound. And what he choose to tell, he spoke
with a certain goodheartedness. He scarcely left his cell, except
for the holy mysteries s ). He was constantly concentrated and
in solitude.
Once 1 said to him : Father, I purpose going on Sunday
and sitting down in the galery of the church and to eat early
in the morning. Then every visitor will see and despise me.
The solitary said to me: It is written: He who offends the
lay people, will not see light. Nobody knows thee in these
regions, neither do people know what thy fame is. So they
will say The solitaries eat early in the morning. There is a
:
143 greater reason. There are novices of weak deliberations, many
of whom will be edified by thee now ; but if they see thee
[eating], they will turn back. The ancient Lathers could clo
such things, because of the signs and the forces which were
wrought through them and because of the great name and
fame they possessed. These things they practised, each ofthem
in order to be despised and blamed, and to obscure the fame
of his behaviour and to keep far from him the cause of
haughtiness. But what is the necessity for thee to act in this
way? Doest thou not know that even for the behaviour [of
solitaries] moderation is necessary and a fixed time for every
one of their works? But what necessity is there for thee regar-
ding such things? Thou doest not follow a distinct discipline,
nor art thou famous. Thou hast the same discipline as the
other brethren. Therefore, thou doest not gain profit for thy-
self by doing so, but thou art harmful for others.
1) Translation according to the London Ms-;. 2) r^-SLflO 3) The Eucharist
Vevh. Af.l. l.eucrk. ,022 .WVixiiick'. 7

c;8 THINGS WHICH I iiavk HKAKI) from old mkn ktc
And this behaviour '), is not profitable for all men, but for
the great and perfect only, because it involves relaxation of
the senses. For the novices and those of the middle state
however it is very harmful. For they, on the contrary, need
watchfulness and subduing of the senses. For the trained soli-
taries have passed [the period of] watchfulness, as has been
said, and mix with what they like, yet know to gain profit.
A simple merchant will lose greatly in great affairs; in small
ones he often easily comes forward. Therefore, as I have said,
J44 in all work moderation is necessary •, and every discipline has
its fixed time. Every one who, before its time, begins with
what is above his rank, will be injured and gain no profit.
If thou desirest this, first suffer that disdain which Providence
sends thee without thy willing it, gladly, without being troubled
thereat and without hating those who disdain thee.
Concerning another solitary. Once I was in inter-
course with the virtuous one that had tasted from the tree of
life in the sweat of his soul, from the morning of youth until
the evening of old age. And after much conversation in which
he taught me concerning excellence, he also said this to me:
Every prayer, in which the body does not participate and by
which the heart is not affected, is to be reckoned as an abor-
tion without a soul.
Further he said to me Have not the slightest intercourse
:
with any man who strives after victory in his words, and is
astute in spirit and of keen .senses, lest thou destroy the
serenity thou hast acquired by works and thy heart become
—
full of darkness and trouble.
Once I went to the cell of one of the Fathers. This saintly
man scarcely ever opened to any one. When he saw from his
window that it was I, he said: Thou wishest to enter? I said
to him : Ay. When I had entered and we had prayed and sat
clown and he had spoken with me concerning many things, I
asked him at last: What shall I do, my lord? There are persons
who constantly visit me, without my profiting by their inter-
145 course. To forbid them to enter would be painful to me. They
often hinder me even in my usual service. But I am not able
to say so to them openly. So I am much troubled by this
matter.
1^ Assuming the habits of sin

;
thin'os which i n.wrc hkakd i-'Ko.vr old mf,x ktc. 99
This blessed man said to me When such people visit thee,
:
people who like to be lazy and who spread ] idle words, and
)
when they have sat down a little time, assume the air that
thou desirest to stand for service. And say to (thy visitor],
whosoever he be, with an obeisance My brother, we will
:
perform the service. For the time of my service is come and
I may not overlook it. For it would be hard for me to com-
bine it with the next prayer; that would cause me trouble;
and I may not omit any service without [the plea of) ne — cessity.
At present there is no necessity to let the time pass. This
shalt thou urge till he stand up with thee for the service. An — d
if he say : Perform thou thy service, now I will go away
make an obeisance before him and say Be kind to me and
:
perform with me this single service, that I may be helped by
thy prayer. Then, when he agrees and you are standing, make
thy service longer than usually. So thou shalt do with them
as often as they enter. And when they see that thou art not
of their kind and that thou doest not love idleness, then they
will no more come where they hear that thou art. Behold,
thou shalt be no respecter of persons and neglect none of the
works of God.
If, however, [thy visitor] be one of the Fathers, or a foreign
146 brother who is fatigued, then deem it an important service to
remain in intercourse with him. But if this stranger also should
be one of those who love idle words, content him as much as
thou canst and dispatch him quickly.
Once one of the saints said to me : When I hear, that there
are people who perform work in their cell and also accomplish
the rules of the cell without failure, I wonder how it is possible
that they are not troubled.
He also said a wonderful thing : verily, I say that even when
I go to make water, this troubles my constancy [of mind]
because practice turns away from me the complete discernment
which have mastered.
I
A solitary asked a brother: What shall I do? Often I desire
a thing and am in need of it on account of illness, or work,
or some other reason, so that by its aid I would nigh well be
able to lead a life of solitude. But if I see anyone who needs
this thing as I do, then compassion causes me to give it him.
1; tjaH&sa

lOO THINGS WHICH [ HAVE IIICARD FROM OT.D MKN ETC.
Or if any one asks me for this thing, I am pressed by love
and by command so that I give it him. But afterwards I require
this thing. And my need causes me care and disturbance and
troubled thoughts, and it takes away my concentration of spirit
and my care for the usual service of solitude. So that I am
147 compelled many times to leave my solitude and go and ask
for this thing. And when I restrain myself from going out, I
am in great need and perturbance of mind. On account of this
thing" I am constantly shaken and disturbed without knowing
which of the two I shall choose : that which destroys and
disturbs my peace for the sake of the peace of my neighbours;
or to abandon this, so as to remain in solitude and renuncia-
tion, and to care for the small things of my self only, without
any inclination to think many thoughts or to care for others.
I beg to learn, in answer to this, what is good and worthy
of recommendation. The solitary answered saying: All com-
passion is either love, or alms, or a gift. And every becoming
thing, and every deed reckoned as being godly which destroys
thy solitude and bereaves thee of thy freedom regarding the
world, and causes thee care and troubles thy thoughts concer-
ning divine things, and breaks the order of thy prayers and
brings about troubled deliberations and takes from thee the
concentrated occupation with recitation and freedom from dis-
traction, and destroys thy watchfulness and makes thee instead
of a prisoner one who walks where he likes and [changes}
thee from a solitary into one who mingles [with other people]
and awakens in thee buried passions and relaxes the asceticism
of thy senses and quickens thee again who wert dead to the
world and casts thee out of thy angelic service which is con-
centrated solitary thought, and sets thy part with the service
—
of the laity this [sort ofj righteousness may perish. To
accomplish alms of love to thy neighbour, consisting in bodily
148 comfort, belongs to the service of lay-people, or of those soli-
taries who are inferior to service in solitude or practice a
mingled solitude in— the company of one another and through
constant visits l). But those solitaries who have earnestly
chosen to be free from the world in body and in spirit in
order to establish in their mind the prayer of solitude which
is the being dead to the things that perish and to all thought
1) literally: entering and departing

THINGS WHICH I HAVE HEARD FROM OLD MEN ETC. lOI
of practice and seeing and recollecting [worldly] things, they do
not serve Christ by any service in these bodily things or with
a righteousness founded upon manifest deeds with the inter-
mediation of persons in order to be justified thereby, but [they
serve Him] by mortifying their members which are upon the
earth '), according to the word of the Apostle, offering at all
times the pure sacrifices of their thoughts as the first fruits of
their service and their bodily affections through patience in
trouble for the sake of that which they expect. The behaviour
of the solitaries is like that of the angels. So it is not just to
neglect the service of heavenly things and to gather righte-
ousness by [practising] earthly things.
A
brother was blamed because he provided the wants of the
poor from his own possessions. He answered proudly Solitaries
:
are near to alms. He that blamed him said Well known is
:
the solitary who is not near to alms ; who without shame can
say to our Lord, as has been said Behold, we have forsaken
:
all, and followed thee 2 ). This is he that does not possess any-
149 thing on the earth, nor does he perform bodily labour for
earthly things, his thoughts do not turn to any of the visible
things in the world, nor does he expect to acquire anything.
If any one offers anything to him, he only accepts according
to his want ; he never looks at aught else. But he is in his
dealings like a bird, the which does not think of giving alms;
for he has a service more excellent than alms.
How can he give others from that of which he is liberated?
But as long as a man works with his hands and receives from
others, he is also obliged to give alms. To neglect this would
be a manifest transgression of God's commandment. But if he
does not make progress with God in hidden things, and does
not know to serve God in spirit and despise the manifest
things which lie within his power, what further hope has he
to acquire life? Be he anathema.
ADMONITION OF ONE OF THE FATHERS
CONCERNING THE RIGHT SOLITUDE
I wonder at those who trouble themselves in their course of
solitude because they desire to comfort others by bodily things.
l) Colossians 3,5 2) Matthew 19,27

MO
102 THINGS WHICH I HAVK IIKARD I'KOM OLD ETC.
He also said : It is not becoming- to mingle with the service
of solitude the thought of any thing in the world, safe only
those which it is possible to perform in solitude. And we have
to honour every solitary performance in its place, lest we be-
come confuse in our solitary course. For he who cares about
'5° many things, is a slave of many persons. He who lets go all
and cares for the steadfastness of his soul, is a friend of
God. Behold, those who practise alms and completely show
their love of neighbours by bodily things, arc many in the
world. But those who beautifully serve in solitude and have
intercourse with God are scarcely to be found. Or who are,
among those who practise righteousness and gain it by earthly
things, those from whom we may receive one of the gifts
which those who work in solitude receive from God?
The same has further said If thou art a lay man, practise
:
the behaviour which suits lay people. But if thou art a solitary,
gain profit by the labours by which the solitaries gain profit.
If, however, thou wilt practise both, thou wilt fall short in both.
The work of solitaries is this : to become liberated from sensible
things and to be constantly with God in the thoughts of the
heart and through fatiguing the body by prayer. Judge thou
thyself whether it be possible to despise these things and to
fill their place with worldly excellence. Or should a solitary be
able to practise in solitude two kinds of behaviour, the outward
and the inward one viz. meditation on God and burdening his
heart with the care of others? I say even this that he who
has honestly willed to lead a life with God, and lea — ves all,
fixing his attention solely upon matters of behaviour that
even he will not be able to accomplish without shortcomings
•51 all the duties of the practice of solitude. He is found wanting
in the bearing of his load, though he desists absolutely from
—
the use and the care of the world not to mention the case
of his being occupied by many other thoughts.
To our Lord are given l those who administer and visit His
)
servants and His sons. He has also chosen those who minister
before Himself.
We
do not only see, in the affairs of earthly kings, that
those who are constantly with the king and participate of his
secrets arc more glorious and elevated in their ranks than those
O

TfiiN<;.s which i n.wr; heard from ou> mex etc. 103
who accomplish their outward affairs with love, but, also in
divine affairs, it is easy to see what a freedom of speech those
possess who, in intercourse with Him possess the mysteries of
prayer at all times and over what riches of heaven and earth
;
they reign, and how apparent is their mastership over all
created natures, which, without dispute, obey their words as
those of God. They are stamped with the manifest sign of His
image, with a glory greater than that of all rational and irra-
tional l beings, greater than that of those who serve God with
)
possessions and earthly things and seek to content Him in [the
company of] their companions. This may be very beautiful,
but as to us, we have not to take as examples those who
stand at a low degree in the service of God, but those who
are athletes in our path -) and the saints who go our course,
and those who once for all have given up and turned their
back on the earth and have taken hold of the vault of
heaven.
Whereby have the ancient saints pleased God, those who
152 have trodden the way of our behaviour and have excelled:
the holy John of Thebai's, that treasury of excellence and foun-
tain of prophecy? Did he comfort his companions with bodily
things, in his reclusion, or did he please God by prayer? I
confess that there have been [solitaries] who also in these things
pleased [God] and gained profit. But they are less in number
than those who pleased God by prayer and by renouncing all
things. What their help to their followbrethren who live in
solitude is, is well known. It consists in helping them as often
as they are in want of a profitable word or [in helping them]
by offering prayer in behalf of them. Apart from these things,
it is not wise for him who dwells in solitude to give place in
his heart to recollections or thoughts concerning any one as
far as bodily things are concerned. 'Render unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's and unto God the things that are
;
God's ;i ) and what belongs to a neighbour is his, and what
belongs to God is His' does not apply to those who dwell in
solitude, but to those who walk without. It is not the duty of
him who performs the service of the angels with the thoughts
of the soul, to please in earthly things; namely to have thought
1) Literally: speaking and mute
2) In the sense of: mystic course. .)£iL>_>
3) Matthew 22,21

104 TIIIXUS WHICH I IIAYK likard from old mk.\ ktc.
for manual work or to taking from others and giving to others.
His service is in heaven.
It is not becoming for the solitary to allow the thought of
anything to move and drive away his spirit from before God.
If, however, anyone dare to adduce the example of Paul, who
153 also performed [manual] work and also gave alms, we reply
to him Paul was unique and a master in all things. We know
:
not that another Paul has ever existed who was a master in
all things like him. Show it me, if thou art found to be another
Paul, and I will believe thee. Do not, therefore, compare the
matters of government with the inner practice. For the work
of the heralds is different from that of solitude.
But if thou wilt master solitude, be like a Cherub who has
no care for earthly things. And think that there is no other
man in the created world, excepted thee alone, and God about
whom thou thinkest, as thy Fathers who have gone the way
before thee, have taught thee. Unless a man harden his heart
and restrain his compassion forcibly so as to be far from the
thought of any man — , should it be for the sake of God or of
any bodily being but he shall only be in prayer, at the
times — appointed to him, lest love or care of anyone enter his
heart it is not possible for him to be freed from the trouble
of thought or to be in solitude. So much is certain. But when
a deliberation is awake in thee, urging thee to the thought of
anyone under the pretext of excellence, the purpose of which
is to drive away from thee the peace that was becoming cus-
tomary to thy heart through the recollection of God, then say
to it : it is beautiful to lead a life of love and compassion for
the sake of God, but I do not seek it, even for the sake o(
God, so it only remains to me to drive thee away for the sake
of God. Thus the solitary will speak. Then the deliberation
154 will say to him : And I flee from thee for the sake of God.
Aba Arsenius, for the sake of God, did not open his mouth
to speak, neither profitable nor gratuitous words. Another,
however, for the sake of God, spoke the whole day and
received all the strangers that visited that place. The former,
in stead of this, chose silence and solitude.
Thus he voyaged with the spirit of God on the ocean of
this world in the ship of solitude, in exalted peace, as is shown
in revelation to the athletes who investigate this thing.
This is another denomination of solitude rest from all
:

OX Till'. RKVKLA I'll„>NS AND 1'OWKRS WHICH I''.'1V. IO5
things '). If thou art full of trouble even in solitude, because
thy body is troubled by manual service and various affairs,
and because thy soul is troubled by the thought of others,
what peace doest thou possess then to care for many things
and to please God? Judge thyself. It appears to me ridiculous
to talk about mastering the course of solitude without abando-
ning all things and the care of all things.
XIX
ON THE REVELATIONS AND POWERS WHICH
HAPPEN TO THE SAINTS IN IMAGES
The degree of revelation is not the same as that a man
deepen his emotions by the study of wisdom and by intellectual
labour so as to arrive at some understanding and contemplation
155 of anything by mental investigation. For it is said: Revelation
is silence of intellect. And by zealous efforts and human thoughts
no one can imagine that he has found knowledge this happens
;
by spiritual power so that he to whom the revelation is imparted,
at that time is not aware of any thought of his soul nor of those
things which present themselves to his senses neither does he
;
use them nor is he acquainted with them.
This we do not assert on our own authority, but it can be
proved sufficiently from the writings of the prophets, who, when
revelations happened to them, did not perceive any of the
usual things nor could they use their thoughts at will nor had
they any sensual apperceptions, because they were in ecstasy.
Their mind was wholly concentrated upon those things which
appeared to them during the revelation. As it happened to the
blessed Peter when he was hungry and ascended unto the roof
in order to pray when the revelation began, he did not per-
:
ceive his hunger. ELven the recollection of food was effaced
from his mind, because he was in ecstasy, as scripture says2 ).
Concerning all these things one may be well instructed in
particulars from the writings of the blessed bishop Theodore,
the light of the whole world ;<). For he speaks about the kind
2) Acts 10, IO 3) Theodore bkhop of Mopsucsti;i

106 OX THE RKVJ'XATIONS AND L'OWKUS WHICH KTC.
and the rank of revelations, especially in the three volumes on
*56 Genesis and in the two volumes on Job and in the last one
about the Twelve Prophets, and in the commentaries on the
Acts and the Gospel of Matthew.
Scripture mentions six kinds of revelations. The first: that
by the senses. The second : by psychic sight. The third : by-
rapture l ) of the spirit. The fourth : by the rank of prophecy.
The fifth : in some intellectual way. The sixth : as it were by
a dream.
Revelations by the senses are divided into two different kinds
:
those which take place by means of the elements and those
which take place without matter. Examples of the former
kind are the revelation in the thornbush, in the cloud, in the
tables and so on, things which were also seen by the people;
also those wondrous things which every day happen in the
whole world and the causes and details of which are gained
by the saints in revelations and also the works and deeds
;
and things which are hidden or far away, yet are revealed
unto some at the time of their actual occurence.
Without matter: as for instance the men that appeared
unto Abraham, the ladder of Jacob, the revelation about the
tabernacle (try only to look at and to act with the likeness
that appeared unto thee on the mountain, and so on), the
divine light of exalted rays that shone for Paul on the way
and blinded his eyes. It is well known that, though a revelation,
it was visible and perceptible by the senses , so that also
those who were with him saw and heard it •, yet it was not a
material revelation, nor a natural and elementary light, as the
:57 blessed commentator denotes in his commentary on the story
in the Acts: And those who went on the way with Paul,
stood in amazement while they heard the voice, yet did not
see anyone. He comments on the words, in amazement' thus:
In silence without [uttering] a word, also seized with doubt,
because they had caught the voice that had spoken to him
and, as far as it was possible for them, had seen the light
that appeared unto him. Lest it should be surmised later that
Saul had invented what had happened and that which had
been wrought unto him, while none of those who were with
him had heard or seen it. But they did not see anyone. For
r^c\\u
i)

4
ON TlIK KKVIXATIUNS AND I'OWKRS WHICH ICTC. IO7
they did not see Jesus, because, as I have said, that which
appeared was even no sensible light, but an incomprehensible
apperception which in an immaterial way was given him by
divine action in the likeness of a vision of light, so — that he
thought that the heavens were opened and so on. These
are the revelations which have taken place through the medium
of the bodily senses. They are exalted above any commixture
with the elements or any of the sensible and human events.
But those who receive these revelations are not enveloped
in ecstasy of mind, as in the case of the revelation that takes
place through the eyes of the soul in the vision of the soul,
as : I saw the Lord sitting on a high throne and Seraphs
each with six wings round it '), and as in the revelation unto
Kzekiel, in the revelation of the wheels and the amazing images,
and the sound from the wheels resembling- the sound of the
158 sea, and the glorifications heard from the Cherubs with many
eyes, which say : Blessed is the majesty of the Lord in His
place. How much subtler these revelations are than those of
the first mentioned class, is known to the illuminated. (To the
second class also belongs] for instance the vessel that appeared
to Peter and the animals in it, with the other things des-
cribed.. And he who wishes, may recognize these things from
the scriptures.
Rapture of the spirit, as for instance when he was
taken up unto the third heaven, and whether this was in the
body or without, I do not know. But he was taken to Para-
dise and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for
a man to utter -').
Prophecy, as for instance the things that happened unto
the Prophets, who foretold future events, many ages before they
took place, as it was also given unto Balaam the sorcerer to
foretell many things through the spirit of prophecy, things even
more numerous than what prophets had prophesied.
In some intellectual way. As for instance the blessed
Paul says: I pray that you may be filled with the knowledge
of God in all wisdom and spiritual understanding8 ). And: May
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give
unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
1) Isaiah 6, 1 2) 2 Cor. 12,2—
3) Colossians i,9

IOS ON TMIi KEVia-ATlUNS AND I'OWKRS WHU'H K'LV.
of Him: the eyes of your hearts being enlightened; that ye
may know what is the hope of His calling, and the riches of
His glory in the saints, and the exceeding greatness of His
power in us who believe x and the other things which were
)
given to the Apostle in a revelation of knowledge concerning
159 the things of the world to be, and the order of resurrection
and the alteration of human bodies and so on. And as for
the degree of exalted understanding and the knowledge of the
divine nature, as for instance that [man] is the likeness of the
invisible God and that with His hand He has made the worlds,
God has given us revelation by His spirit. Again we know in
part and we understand in part 3 and In the beginning was
) ; :
the word 3 and Thou art the Christ, the son of the living
) ; :
God 4 and so on. Again, unsearchable are His judgments, and
)
His ways past finding out 5 ) ; and : He who worketh all after
the counsel of His own will ,! and God hath concluded them
) ; :
all in unbelief, that He might have mercy upon all") and soon.
These are designations of the insight which was given unto
them that they sought to know and understand through the
Spirit the divine nature.
By dreams, as for instance happened to Abimelek and
Joseph and Pharao and Nebukednesar and when the angel of
;
the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph the husband of Mary,
and so on.
Also this it is necessary to know : that all revelations, which
God has granted for the sake of teaching mankind and in-
structing them concerning things, take place by means ofimages,
especially revelations unto those who arc ofsimple understanding
and of small insight in the truth. But those which are destined
to comfort and to instruct some person, and to console to
160 some extent and to instruct a single person, take place without
images and by intelligible apperception. This is clearly proved
by the blessed commentator s in the second volume on Job.
)
For how much greater, as compared with other revelations,
are the things which are given in a revelation for the intellect
and the understanding through an intellectual medium and
how much higher are the mysteries which serve to instruct all
concerning God. This is perfection of knowledge.
—
1) Ephcsinns I, 17 19 2) I Corinthians 13, 12 3) John I, 1
4) Matthew 16,16 5) Romans 11,33 6) Kpliesians 1,11
7) Romans 11,32 8) Theodore

ON THE REVELATIONS AND POWERS WHICH ETC. IO9
And also this it is becoming to know: Revelation and [divine]
action are different from truth and knowledge in so far as
revelation is not the exact truth, but only shows indications
and signs corresponding to human strength. Neither may the
action and the wondrous things in those revelations be called
knowledge and truth. They are called inspiration caused by
[divine] action. So that it is impossible to gain from them
instruction concerning God's foreknowledge or His incompre-
hensible nature or Mis different qualities or the understanding
of the mysteries of Mis will concerning mankind and the other
things which are to be attained by sound knowledge concerning
Him. Therefore: the mysteries which are attained by the in-
tellect through insight into the divine nature is different from
the action by which the mind is inspired during a certain time.
Therefore it is not absolutely necessary that every one to whom
a revelation is imparted or who is influenced by a consoling-
action, must know the truth and the exact knowledge con-
161 cerning God. For many are those to whom such things were
imparted, yet knew God as children only.
XX
ON VARIOUS INTELLIGIBLE FORCES OF THE MIND
IN CONNECTION WITH THE. ACTION OF REVELA-
TIONS AND SPIRITUAL VISIONS
Divine sight is a non-apperceptible mental revelation. Divine
revelation is an emotion of the mind by spiritual understanding,
concerning the divine being. It is not even a faculty of the
nature of the angels to be stirred into emotion at will, without
a revelation granted by [divine] grace. Emotion by revelations
concerning God's activity is different from emotion by revela-
tions concerning the nature of His being. The former is of a
nature to have analogy with apperceptible things. The latter
has absolutely no analogy with the intellect or anything. It is
threefold purity as to its parts and its nature, as it is said.
And it is impossible that one of the thousand righteous should
be deemed worthy of this high apperception. Also speculation
concerning the incarnation of our Lord and His revelation in
the flesh is said to belong to divine speculation.

I ro ON VARIOUS INTKI.T.TGIIH/F. FORCES OF THF. MIND FTC.
The true sight of the angels is emotion by spiritual under-
standing concerning their domain. But it is impossible for us
162 to see the nature of spiritual forces without the mind.
When man is deemed worthy of seeing them in their nature
and in their place and as they are in their spiritual creation,
grace moves his mind by the revelation of spiritual insight
concerning them. When the soul has been purified and is
worthy of seeing its fellows, their sight is perceived with
')
these eyes. They are not objects and they cannot be seen as
they are, without alteration, but by psychic sight which is true
contemplation. This means without deterioration of their nature
:
by sight. This sight cannot be acquired by any man without
the second purification of the mind.
But the fact that the angels appear unto some men in
images, is not due to true sight ; but the angels minister unto
the order of government by their mission. Or they show them-
selves for the consolation and encouragement of the simple,
[in forms] perceptible by sight.
Such visions even happen to those who are not pure. But
the first kind happens to illuminated and initiated people, who,
by the glorious course of solitude, have been elevated unto the
rank of purity.
XXI
ON THAT WHICH HAPPENS DURING PRAYER [UNTO
WHO
THOSE LIVE] IN SOLITUDE
Who is he that knows that delightful bending of the knees,
when the tongue is silent and the heart silently utters some
glorification, and its delightful emotion does not abate, the
ifi3 body resting on the knees in silence? Blessed who eats from
these things perpetually. But they do not happen at will, nor
when one seeks them. This is in part the delight which is
given for the consolation of him who walks without a blame
before the Lord in the course of solitude.
If he continues this course in all simplicity, and seeks the
purity of his service, and if his behaviour is worthy, after some
time he will be deemed worthy of the things mentioned above.
1) In some Mss.: not.

ON THAT WHICH HA1TKNS DURING PRAYKR KTO. Ill
As to those who are novices in this course and who have a
fixed aim, Grace at first will make them apt for the taste of
these and similar things by recitation and it will draw their
thoughts towards its self, away from earthly thoughts. Then
they will work and wake and pray without becoming fatigued.
Unto those who are trained to some extent in the mysteries
of solitude, apperceptive power during prayer and service will
be imparted.
XXII
ON VARIOUS [EXPERIENCES] DURING PRAYER AND
ON THE LIMITS OF THE POWER OF THE MIND.
AND IN HOW FAR IT HAS POWER TO MOVE ITS
ARBITRARY IMPULSES BY THE VARIOUS HABITS OF
PRAYER. AND WHAT IS THE LIMIT PRESCRIBED
TO NATURE DURING PRAYER, THE LIMIT WHICH
PRAYER IS NOT ALLOWED TO SURPASS. AND HOW
WHEN IT HAS PASSED IT AND HAS PROCEEDED
FARTHER, IT IS NO LONGER PRAYER, EVEN THOUGH
WHAT HAPPENS CALLED BY THE NAME OF
IS
PRAYER
Glory to Him whose gift has been poured out upon man-
kind, in that He has ordained that they, although of the flesh,
should serve on the earth the class of immaterial beings and
has deemed worthy the nature of mortals to speak about such
164 mysteries, especially sinners as we are, who are not even
worthy of hearing speech concerning such things. In His bounty
He has opened our blind heart to understand, by the con-
templation of the scriptures and the instruction of the great
Fathers even although I have not been deemed worthy of
experiencing for personal zeal one thousandth of what I have
written with my hands, especially in this tract, which we have
ventured to write for the illumination and exhortation of our
soul and of those who come across it, that perhaps, on account
of its desire, it may be incited to approach unto practice.
How then ? Delight during prayer is different from sight
during prayer. The latter is more excellent than the former,
as an adult man is superior to a little boy. It will happen

112 ON VARIOUS [KXI'KRTKNCKS] DURING 1'RAVKR KTC
that the words become sweet in the mouth and that one word
of prayer is repeated infinitely so that no feeling of satiety
with it causes thee to proceed and to pass over to a second.
Sometimes from prayer a certain contemplation is born which
also makes prayer vanish from the lips. And he to whom this
contemplation happens becomes as a corpse without soul, in
ecstasy. This we call sight during prayer and not an image
or form forged by phantasy, as fools say. Also in this con-
templation during prayer there are degrees and differences in
gifts. But till this point there is still prayer. For thought has
not yet passed into the state where there is no prayer, but a
165 state superior to it. For the motions of the tongue and the
heart during prayer, are keys. What comes after them is the
entering into the treasury. Mere then all mouths and tongues
are silent, and the heart, the treasurer of the thoughts, the mind,
the ^governor of the senses, the daring spirit, that swift bird,
and all their means and powers and the beseeching persuasions
have to stand still there : for the master of the house has come.
F"or like as the whole force of the laws and the command-
ments which God has laid down for mankind, have their term
in the purity of the heart, according to the word ofthe Fathers,
so all kinds and habits of prayer with which mankind prays
unto God, have their term in pure prayer. Lamentations and
selfhumiliations and beseechings and inner supplications and
—
sweet tears and all other habits which prayer possesses, as
I have haid : their boundary and the domain within which they
are set into motion, is pure prayer.
As soon as the spirit has crossed the boundary of pure
prayer and proceeded onwards, there is neither prayer, nor
emotions, nor tears, nor authority, nor freedom, nor beseechings,
nor desire, nor longing after any of those things which are
hoped for in this world or in the world to be.
Therefore there is no prayer beyond pure prayer, and all
its emotions and habits by their authority with freedom conduct
166 the spirit thus far and there is struggle in it; but beyond this
limit it passes into ecstasy and is no longer prayer. From here
onwards the spirit desists from prayer ; there is sight, but the
spirit does not pray.
Every kind of prayer which exists is set into motion by the
impulses of the soul. But when the mind has entered the
emotions of spirituality, then it can no longer pray.

3
ON VARIOUS [EXPERIENCES] DURING PRAYER ETC. I 1
Prayer is different from contemplation during- prayer, though
they are caused by each other. One is the seed ; the other
the load [of harvest] borne by the hands, while the reaper is
astonished by the undescribable sight of how from the mean
and bare grains of seed glorious ears suddenly grow up before
him. And during sight he remains without motion.
Every prayer which exists, is demand and request, or praise
or thanksgiving. But judge whether there exists any of these
modes, or demand of anything, when the mind has passed
into this domain and has entered this place.
I ask this of those who know the truth. It is not given to
every one to enquire into these distinctions, but only to those
who have been personally witness and ministers of this matter
or have been brought up in the presence of the spiritual
authorsJ of such experiences and have received the truth from
)
their mouth and have passed their days with such occupations,
asking and answering concerning matters of truth. As among
ten thousand men there is scarcely to be found a single one
167 who has fulfilled the commandments and the laws to any extent
and who has been deemed worthy of serenity of soul, so
there is rarely to be found one among many, who on account
of strenuous vigilance has been deemed worthy of pure prayer
and who has made his way into this domain and been deemed
worthy of this mystery. Not many are deemed worthy of pure
prayer, only a few. But as to that mystery which lies beyond,
there is scarcely to be found a single man in every generation
who has drawn near to this knowledge of God's grace.
Prayer is a beseeching for, a caring for, a longing for some
thing, either liberation from the evil things here or [in the
world] to come, or a desire for promised things, or a demand
for something by which man wishes to be brought nearer unto
God. In these emotions are included all habits of prayer. But
its being pure or not depends upon the following circumstances.
If, when the spirit is prepared to offer one of the emotions
which we have enumerated, any foreign deliberation or dis-
traction mingles itself with it, prayer is called non-pure, because
it has brought upon the altar of the Lord an animal which
it is not allowed [to offer], the altar which is an upright, in-
telligible heart.
1) literally: the Fathers
Verh. Afd. Lcttcrk. 1922 (Wcnsinck).

t 14 OX VARIOUS [EXPERIENCES] DURING PRAYER ETC.
But when the spirit gives itself with longing to one of these
emotions, in accordance to the necessity of the case, at the
time of beseeching, and when on account of its alacrity the
gaze of the emotion is directed by the eye of faith beyond
the curtain of the heart, the entrances of the soul are closed
thereby against the foreign deliberations which are called
168 strangers '), whom the law does not allow to enter the taber-
nacle. This is called the accepted offering of the heart and
pure prayer. Its boundaries are to this point. What lies beyond
cannot be called prayer.
If any one should mention what by the Fathers is called
spiritual prayer, without understanding the force of the words
of the Fathers, saying This belongs also to the domain of
:
prayer, I think that, if he should reach true insight, it would
prove a blasphemy if there should be found any of the crea-
tures who should say that spiritual prayer can be prayed at
all. For all prayer that can be prayed, lies on this side of
spirituality. And all that is spiritual, is in kind free from emo-
tion and prayer.
Now if man is hardly able to pray pure prayer what must
be said of spiritual prayer? The holy Fathers are accustomed
to designate all profitable emotions and all spiritual working
by the name of prayer. And the blessed commentator ~) even
counts beautiful deeds as prayer; though it is clear that prayer
is different from deeds which are things done. But sometimes
they designate by spiritual prayer that which they sometimes
call contemplation and sometimes knowledge and sometimes
; ;
revelations of intelligible things. Doest thou see, how the Fathers
169 change their designations of spiritual things? This is because
accurate designations can only be established concerning earthly
things. The things of the world-to-be do not possess a true
name, but only simple cognition, which is exalted above all
names and signs and forms and colours and habits and com-
posite denominations. When, therefore, the knowledge of the
soul exalts itself above this circle of visible things, the Fathers
use concerning this knowlegde any designations they like, though
no one does know the real names in order that the psychic
deliberations may be based on them. We use denominations
and riddles, according to the word of the holy Dionysius3 who
)
1) r^iAA^^ proselytes 2) Theodore of Mopsucstia 3) Areopngita

5
ON VARIOUS [EXPERIENCES] DURING TRAYER ETC. I 1
We
says : use signs and syllables, conventional names and
words in behalf of the senses. But when by spiritual working
our soul is moved unto divine things, then the senses and
their workings are superfluous to us, as also the spiritual forces
of the soul are superfluous as soon as our soul becomes the
image ofthe godhead through unification with the incomprehen-
sible and radiant in the rays of the sublime, by those impulses
which are not for the eyes.
Therefore, my brother, of this thou mayest be sure: that
the power of the mind to use the emotions with discernment
has its limit in purity during prayer. When the mind has
reached this point, it will either turn backwards, or it will
desist from prayer •, so prayer is, as it were, a mediator be-
tween the psychic and the spiritual state. As long, however, as
170 it is in emotion, it is in the psychic state. But as soon as it
has passed this limit, prayer ceases.
As the saints, in the world to come do not pray, when the
mind has been engulfed by the [divine spirit, but they dwell
|
in ecstasy in that delightful glory, so the mind, when it has
been made worthy of perceiving the future blessedness, will
forget itself and all that is here, and it will not be moved any
longer by the thought of anything a
).
Man, therefore, may freely go so far as to say all excel-
:
lence whatever and all orders of prayer whatever, in body or
in spirit, are in the realm of free will, as well as the mind
that dominates the senses. But when the influence of the spirit
reigns over the mind that regulates the senses and the deli-
berations, freedom is taken away from nature which no longer
governs but is governed. And how could there be prayer at
that time, when nature does not possess power over its self,
but is conducted by an outward force without knowing whither.
Nature then does not direct the emotions of the spirit accor-
ding to its will, but captivity reigns over nature in that hour
and conducts it there where sensual apperception ceases ; be-
cause nature even has no will at that time, even to this extent
that it does not know whether it is in or without the body,
as scripture testifies. Has therefore such a one prayer who is
a captive to this degree and who even does not know himself?
So no one should say with blasphemy that there is anyone
1) Cf. Plotinus's description ofthe mind's delight when it has forgotten matter VI,7§34.

6 on various [experiences] during prayer etc.
l i
who could venture to say that it is possible to pray spiritual
171 prayer. This audaciousness the Mesalleyane vindicate for them-
selves, those haughty ignorants who proclaim concerning them-
selves that they are able to pray spiritual prayer when they
like. But those who are humble and have insight and are in-
clined to learn from the Fathers and know the limits of nature,
do not abandon their deliberations to this audaciousness.
And therefore, when there is no prayer, can then this un-
speakable gift be designated by the name of prayer? The
cause, as we say, is therein, that at the time of prayer [this
giftj is granted unto those who are worthy. And in prayer it
has its starting-point, because this glorious gift cannot be granted
excepted at this time, according to the testimony of the Fathers.
Therefore it is called by the name of prayer, because from
prayer the mind is conducted towards this blessed state, and
because prayer is its starting-point and it does not occur on
any other occasion, according to the testimony of Mar Euagrius
and others. And we see also that the majority of the saints
say that during prayer their mind was snatched 1
).
If any one asks : Flow is it that at this time only these
great and unspeakable gifts are granted? we answer: Because
at this time, more than in any other hour, man is concentrated
and prepared to look unto God and to desire and to expect
compassion from Him. In short: it is the time that the
demand of him who is at the gate of the king and asks desi-
172 ringly and beseechingly, is likely to be heard. And what time
is there when man is so cautious and fit and prepared, as the
time when he prays? Or should it be becoming that he should
be deemed worthy of this at the time when he sleeps or settles
any affair or is distracted of mind? However, the saints do not
even know a time of idleness, because at all times they are
occupied by spiritual things, for when they are not standing in
preparation for prayer, they often meditate upon some stories
of the scriptures, or their mind meditates in contemplation of
the created things, or [their mind is occupied] with other things
meditation of which is profitable.
At the time of prayer the gaze of the spirit is exclusively
fixed on God and the tendency of its emotion is wholly directed
towards Him, and it offers to Him the beseechings of the
1) .2^*j<k=a

ON VARIOUS [EXPERIENCES] DURING PRAYER ETC. 11/
heart with the necessary zeal, with fervour and ardour. There-
fore it is becoming that at this time, when a single thought
dominates the soul, divine mercy should well forth from Him.
IHor we see also that when we offer the visible sacrifice, while
every one is prepared and standing in prayer, supplicating and
beseeching, the mind being concentrated upon God, the gift
of the spirit descends upon the bread and wine which we lay
on the altar. To Zechariah also the angel appeared at the time
of prayer and announced to him the conception of John. And
173 to Peter appeared, while he was praying on the roof the
prayer of the sixth hour, the revelation that made him ac-
quainted with the accession of the gentiles, by the cloth that
descended from heaven and by the animals that were on it.
And to Cornelius appeared, when he prayed, that which is
written concerning him. And God spoke with Joshua the son
of Nun while he was prostrated in prayer. And over the ark
was placed a plate, from which the priest was taught by divine
revelation what was required, at the time when the high priest,
once in a year, entered the inner sanctuary at the dreadful
time of prayer while all the tribes of the children of Israel
were gathered and stood in trembling and fear in the outer
tabernacle in prayer. And while the high priest was prostrated
the voice of God was heard from the plate over the ark, in
a dreadful, unspeakable revelation. How dreadful was the
mystery that was ministered in this ceremony So all the
!
revelations and visions that happened unto the saints, happened
at the time of prayer.
What time is so holy and fit for sanctification and the re-
ceiving of gifts as the time of prayer, in which man speaks
with God? At this time man utters his desires unto God, be-
seeching Him and speaking with Him and his whole emotion
and thought are concentrated from all sides upon Him with
'74 compulsion of God alone he thinks and Him alone he sup-
;
plicates ; his whole thought is absorbed in discourse with Him
and his heart is full of Him. It is in this state, therefore, that
the Holy Ghost joins with the things which man prays, some
unattainable insights, which it stirs in him in accordance with his
aptitude of being moved so that by these insights the emotion
of prayer ceases, the mind is absorbed in ecstasy and the desired
object of prayer is forgotten. The impulses are drowned in a
heavy drunkenness and man is no longer in this world. Then

I I 8 ON VARIOUS [EXPERIENCES] DURING PRAYER ETC.
there is no longer discrimination of body or of soul, nor re-
collection of anything, as Euagrius says.
Prayer namely is steadfastness of mind, which is terminated
only by the light of the holy Trinity through ecstasy. Thou
seest, how prayer is terminated when those insights which are
born in the spirit from prayer, pass into ecstasy, as I have
said in the beginning of this treatise and in several places
further on.
Further he ') says : Steadfastness of mind is highness of intel-
ligible apperceptions3 which resembles the colour of the sky
),
over which rises, at the time of prayer, the light of the holy
Trinity. When is a man deemed worthy of the whole of this
grace such that during prayer he is exalted unto this height?
He says When the mind puts off the old man and puts on
:
17s the new one by grace, then it also sees its steadfastness at
the time of prayer, resembling sapphire or the colour ofheaven,
as the place of God was called by the elders of Israel, to
whom it appeared on the mountain:i).
So, as I have said, this gift is not to be called spiritual
prayer, but what then? The fruit of pure prayer, which is
engulfed in the spirit. The mind has ascended here above
prayer. And, having found what is more excellent, it desists
from prayer. And further there is no longer prayer, but the
gaze in ecstasy at the unattainable things which do not belong
to the world of mortals, and peace without knowledge of any
earthly thing. This is the well known ignorance 4 ) concerning
which Euagrius says : Blessed is he who has reached, during
prayer, unconsciousness which is not to be surpassed.
XXIII
ON THE SPEECH OF TRUE KNOWLEDGE
Every apperceptive thing, be it action or word, is the reve-
lation of what is hidden within, if its cause be not entirely
accidental, but return constantly. The latter element only is
—
i) evidently Euagrius 2) literally: things 3) Exodus 24,9 II
4) Cf. Dionysius Areopagita p. 274 "»

9
ON THE SPEECH OK TRUE KNOWLEDGE
I 1
considered in connection with reward; the former is taken into
consideration to a small extent only. For the strength or the
weakness of will is evidenced in the doing- of evil or of good
things, not by anything that happens accidentally but the
;
proof of its freedom is the constant repetition.
To fate is given power ; sometimes even so as to dominate
176 freedom of will. Good or bad accidents meet man be it in
order to spur him on, or to test, or to train, or to reward
him. That which serves to spur on, is good that which serves
;
to test, is considered as being bad ; that which serves to train
and to remunerate is indifferent.
There are no fortuitous accidents for nothing fortuitous
;
happens to man good or evil. There is a governor who
,
governs the things of this world. There is a guardian with
each of us, whom nothing escapes and whose attention never
fails. But all accidents are foreseen by this appointed guar-
dian. And in these four kinds [of accidents] his providence is
active.
Passionate prayer, the companion of a course [of life] in
harmony with its passionate nature, alters the character ofthose
[who are subject to accidents] and brings about amelioration.
The good are strengthened and corroborated by it; to the bad
it causes a change to the opposite direction. Therefore, doubt
not what I have said : there is no accident fortuitous or without
a governor. If indeed prayer combined with steadfestness is
able to alter or to direct, we have to believe that there is a
governor to every accident. Blessed is he who compares every
accident which happens to him, with his hidden state], who
|
scrutinizes its cause and beholds its governor. He that is desi-
rous to acquire experience with God, cannot but become a.fool
to the world and a hater of human glory.
Admirable is the man who conceals the greatness of his
work by lowliness of soul. Such a one is admired by the angels.
As guardians of righteousness have to be reckonned by thee
J77 involuntary defects, which sometimes are found with those who
are watchful.
There is no prayer which is heard so soon as when a man
asks to be reconciled with those who are angry with him. And
when a man charges himself with the fault, this prayer is
answered without delay. If thou fulfillest thy duty and art
watchful in thy domain, yet art weak and despicable in thy

20 ON THE SPEECH OF TRUE KNOWLEDGE
I
own eyes, hating human glory, then know that thou art surely
in the way of God. But if thou perceivest that thou art not
in this state and, when thou explorest thyself, thou seest that
thoughts of blame cause thee pain, then know that thou art
void of truth and in secret relation with falsehood.
XXIV
ON THE THINGS A BROTHER PROVIDED
IS
WITH IN HIS CELL
It occurs many times in a day, that a brother, even if thou
shouldst give him the kingdom of the world, would not consent
at that hour to leave his cell or to [allow] any one to visit
him. For the time of commerce l ) has presented itself, of a
sudden. Such things happen on days such as are considered
as days of relaxation. Often on such days and even on those
wherein he has intercourse with others, grace of a sudden will
visit him, in tears without measure, or a vivid affection moving
178 the heart, or a certain gladness without cause, or the delight
of kneelings.
I know a brother who put the key in the door of his cell
in order to shut it, for he was going out in order to be occu-
pied with idle things as the scripture says2 And there grace
).
visited him, so that he returned immediately. Nobody, there-
fore, shall blame a brother if, on the days on which he does
not keep canonical solitude, he should happen to neglect the
congregational service sometimes. Especially if he be not reputed
base or given to inane occupations, and if he does not neglect
it on account of bodily labour. You know, my brethren, that
our work is not only that which is accomplished before the
eyes of men but we have also a service which is hidden from
;
the eyes of men and which is not known to novices and lay
people. For you are acquainted with the fact, that the solitary
is under a rule and not his own master. Therefore if any of
his brethren conies to visit him and he answers him not, he
shall return immediately without blaming his brother. For he
i) Often the image of spiritual things
2) Eccles. I, 14 etc.

ON THE THINGS A 1SROTHER IS PROVIDED ETC. I2 I
does not know that with which his brother is occupied at that
time. The cell of a solitary is the cave of the rock in which
God spoke with Moses, as the Fathers say. Those solitaries
who have not been put to the test by the service which con-
sists in the true taste of solitude, do not know these things.
They despise their brethren and judge, claiming for themselves
equality with them in all things.
r79 It also happens sometimes that a brother is suddenly set face
to face with some necessary strife, and, with his hands laid
on his heart, he is in danger of flying away. Being prostrated
he beseeches God, not able to bear the voice of any one.
These varying states are known to those who once have crossed
this ocean and are acquainted with the winds blowing [there].
It may also happen that the thought of repentance may rise
in a man and that his past may suddenly be united with the
memory of his death and present itself before him. And this
brilliant sun will be darkened before his eyes and every recol-
lection of the world will be effaced from his heart.
It may also happen that suddenly billows may rise against
him and his ship be engulfed in hidden abysses things which
;
are not known to every one, but which unexpectedly assail
the solitary in his solitude owing to the violent struggles of
Satan, so that the cell becomes a place of mourning.
Numerous are the varying states of this ocean and who
knows its labours and its multifarious connections, the wonderful
pearls in its depth and the animals rising from it? Blessed is
he who sleeps not during the whole of his course until the
port of death.
No one loves anything without multiplying his connections
[with it].
No one is able to occupy himself with divine things without
having cast away and despised temporal ones becoming a
;
stranger to worldly honour and delights, following the disdain
of the cross, drinking every day vinegar and gall on account
of the affections, men, demons and poverty.
Be alert, my brother, and be like a prudent merchant, bea-
180 ring thy pearl and wandering through the world, anxious that
its excellent beauty be not besmirched. Be careful , lest it be
stolen from thee on account of thy laxity and thou go to
Hell in distress.
Persue the small consolation which is gained from labour in

122 ON THE THINGS A BROTHER IS PROVIDED ETC.
its time, that thou may be deemed worthy of that great con-
solation which liberates those who have found it, from torment
in this place of distresses. Do not reject small things, lest thou
be bereaved of the great ones. No one has ever seen a child
which sucks milk putting meat into its mouth. I3y means of
small things the gate unto great ones is opened. Thou dis-
dainest God, o my brother who desirest that God shall govern
thee without His rule. No one has been entrusted with great
things, without having been first tried in small ones. Think of
this, o my brother, and remember me in due time every
:
station which on the morrow thou attainest to in this way of
excellence and knowledge of the truth, will be found by thee
more glorious and excellent than that in which thou hast
spent the night before. Thou departest, wondering at the
beauty of the station which thou has entered to-day. But its
beauty vanishes by the beauty of that which thou wilt reach
to-morrow. Who can perceive the mind's varying states, full of
delight? Pray only, that the gate may be opened before thee.
Be on thy guard against dejectedness. Thou servest not
under a tyrant; thy service is under a kind Lord, who has
given thee all, without taking from thee anything and who,
before thou didst exist at all, destined thee to ocupy thy present
place. Who can do justice to His grace even as shown by His
calling us into existence?
1S1 O, for His immeasurable grace! Who can sufficiently tell the
glory of Him who has given us the knowledge of all things?
Not only of those which are manifest, but also of those which
are hidden, so that we know that, if there is anything that
we know not, we must ask it of Him ; who has taught thee,
o mortal, to be moved by the desire of seeking that of which
the knowledge is not in thy nature? Never seek a consolation
that lies without the heart, which is the knowledge of discern-
ment. Exalt thyself above all consolation administered by the
senses, that thou may be worthy of that consolation which lies
beyond. The solitary who has become alien to the consolation
of the world, without expecting every day the consolation of
Christ, is dead in his living state.
For God is compassionate and prone to give ; but He desires
that we give the opportunity. For He rejoices when man offers
a wise prayer.
The mark of him who is recovering from illness is that he

ON THE THINGS A BROTHER IS PROVIDED ETC. I 23
is desirous of the hidden things. There is delay, however, if
he beholds essential health. He who wearies of asking is the
companion of him who wearies because of delay. Weariness
declines to ask in prayer, viz. it is an impediment to asking.
Dejectedness shortens prayer and bars its prolongation. Ex-
pectation gives patience and incites us to prolong prayer.
Expectation makes light the weight of fatigue in the limbs. It
also knows how to impart rest to the heart in its troubles.
There is no load the weight of which is more agreeable than
work with expectation ; nor is there any comrade with whom
182 intercourse is more desired than with it. Prison is a pleasant
habitation if it be there. Make it thy companion, o repentant
brother, then thou wilt not perceive any of the labours of thy
struggle. If thou art in thy cell, it will be with thee. If thou
art found among men, fix thy mind on it. And if at any time
thy heart errs after anything on the earth, this world and all
that is in it will be found alien to thee. If thou sleep, make
it thy bed-companion and converse with it until thou art en-
;
folded in sleep. Then no depraved deliberation will draw near
thy heart, because thy occupation is of an immaterial kind and
no object clad with matter, which by its appearance moves
the spirit, is able to show itself there ; and no demoniac deli-
beration knows how to show itself detached from material
appearance.
The fruit of life sprouts from endurance in prayer. And
expectation is a helper during prayer to those who possess it.
When thou prayest, remember the husbandman who sows in
hope. And He who causes to return twofold the seed of the
husbandman who sows in faith , and who has estimated the
seeking of His kingdom and His righteousness higher than
the temporal things, He will incline himself to our prayer to
our demands, as He has promised. Amen.

124 T[IK OPPORTUNITIES OK THE SOUL THAT ETC.
XXV
THE OPPORTUNITIES OF THE SOUL THAT SEEKS
PROFOUND CONTEMPLATION TO IMMERSE ITSELF
IN IT AND SO TO ESCAPE FROM BODILY DELIBERA-
TIONS WHICH ARISE FROM THINGS RECOLLECTED
Every J ) thing- that is above another one is concealed from
what is beneath it. And this is not caused by its being covered
183 by other bodies. For it possesses naturally the faculty to unveil
its secrecy whenever it likes to do so. Thus all things which
are essentially intelligible have no external distinctions of rank;
these distinctions are confined to their emotions. This implies
manifestly that they are more suited to receive, without any
intermediary, the primeval light, than things of a lower2 rank,
)
not materially nor locally, but in relation to the high degree
of purity or moderation of the minds, with reference to the
faculty that receives hints from above.
All things which are by their nature intelligible, are hidden
from what is beneath them not on account of natural diver-
;
gences, but on account of excellence of impulses. This I say
in respect of the members of [different] classes, viz. the classes
of holy forces, the classes of souls, the classes of demons. The
first have the middle place ; the last the lowest in a natural
and local respect and also with regard to their emotions.
Each of the classes is hidden from the other as to their
intelligible character, whether they see or not ; from the inferior
ones they are also hidden by nature.
Now then, because incorporeal beings are not to be seen
by other beings in the same way as corporeal beings, but
their [power to] see one another is said to be dependent upon
their emot — ions, namely the excellency and temperance of the
emotions therefore they see one another if they are equal
1) With the ideas of this chapter compare Frothingham, Stephen Bar SudaUi^ p. 92:
"Every intelligent nature is determined, known and comprehended by the essence which
is above it-, and determines, knows and comprehends the essence which is below it; hut
to the pure mind alone belongs the vision above and below'1 . This seems to be the ope-
ning sentence of the Book of Hierotheos,
2) literally: later

THE OPPORTUNITIES OF THE SOUL THAT ETC. 12$
in this respect even at a distance and not as phantoms, but
with real — sight and in their true nature.
l84 Only the cause of all is exalted above these distinctions,
He, who is alone to be adored.
The demons, though they are very impure, are not deprived
of seeing the members of their own classes. But they do not
see the two degrees that are above them because spiritual
sight is serenity of emotions. These are their mirror and their
eyes. And when the emotions have become darkened, they do
not see the orders which are above them. [Only] one another
they see, because they are more material than the order of
spiritual things, in comparison with them. Such is the state of
the demons.
The souls, in accordance with their being impure and obs-
cure, have not the faculty to see even the members of their
own classes. Being deprived of seeing one another, they are
also deprived of seeing themselves. But if they are purified
and return unto the original state in which they were created,
they clearly gaze at the three classes, viz. at those which are
beneath themselves, at those which are above themselves, and
at one another. This does not mean that they see all these
classes only when they are transformed into material simili-
tudes angels, demons or the cognate soul. But they see them
:
in their nature, being in their spiritual state, angels, demons
and souls.
If thou sayest, however, that it is impossible that demon or
angel be seen in their spiritual state without being altered, then
l8s it is not the soul that sees, but the body ; or wherefore, then,
is purification necessary ? Demons are seen sometimes, and also
angels, it is true, by those who are not pure. But they see
them with their bodily eye when they see them, where no
purification is needed. But the soul that has been purified sees
not thus; it sees them in their spiritual state with its natural
eye, viz. with its intellectual faculty.
That the souls see one another, even when they are in the
body, is not surprising. Of this fact there is an evident proof
which thou wilt acknowledge, because its witness is trustworthy.
The blessed Athanasius, the confessor and Catholicus, gives
witness to it in his book on the dealings of Mar Antonius. One
time when Mar Antonius prayed, he saw a man's soul ascending
with great honour. He uttered a blessine over him that had been

126 THE OPPORTUNITIES OF THE SOUL THAT ETC.
deemed worthy of all this grace. This was the blessed Ammon,
the recluse. And the mountain the blessed Antonius inhabited
—
was at a distance of thirteen days from Nitria. Here is a
proof of the three things we have maintained, viz. spiritual
beings see one another even at a distance, without their being
impeded by space and the presence of objects souls see one
;
another when they have been purified when they see they do
;
186 not see in a bodily way but by spiritual faculty, for it is clear
that bodily sight can see what is before it; but as for seeing
at a distance a different sight is needed.
These highest classes possess an unlimited multiplicity of
number. And distinctions and orders are noted among them.
Some of them are called princes and magistrates, powers and
lords. Perhaps those which are entrusted with magistracy and
authority are smaller in number than those which are compelled
to obey their commandment, says the master of teachers Dio-
dorus Rhetor *). For they are in the possession of power and
great if partial insight, in accordance with the highness of their
orders, being gradated so that they ascend from degree to
degree till they reach the one who is older and mightier and
more glorious than any other and who is the head and the
foundation of all creatures. The head, I say, not the creator
of the primeval wonderful works of God.
The angels and the archangels are very far from attaining
to the wisdom of God, their and our creator. They are as far
from it, as those o( the lower degree are from them, but also
no farther. Far, I say, as to their being higher or lower in
their mutual relations not in a spatial sense, but in respect
;
of power and insight. Thus we say that they are higher or
lower in respect of natural power and insight ; for in accordance
with the measure they have reached, greater or lesser know-
ledge is inherent in them.
187 All heavenly beings are named by the divine instruction with
nine designations. It divides these three classes each into three
subdivisions. The first comprises thrones exalted, high and holy;
and Cherubs with many eyes and Seraphs with many wings.
;
The [second] class [comprises] lords and powers and magistrates.
The third princes and archangels and angels.
:
According to the meaning of the Hebrew, these terms are
1) Cf. Introduction, also fortheprovenienceofthe followingclassificationofheavenlybeings.

;
THE OPPORTUNITIES OE the soul that etc. 127
to be interpreted thus: Seraphs means those who cause heat
and fire. Cherubs means magnitude of knowledge and effusion
of wisdom. Thrones means divine acceptance and good pleasure.
This first class is called [that of] the Initiated, not because
they see spiritually by the intermediary of the various apper-
ceptible symbols, or because from spiritual writings they have
acquired understanding concerning the Essence but because
;
they are full of the exalted light of the whole of immaterial
knowledge and have been saturated with the essential con-
templation of the threefold rays of the beauty that creates all
beauties, so far as it has been permitted to them. And because
they have been deemed worthy of communion with Jesus, not
by means of images of holy formation, which with a certain
exactness depict the divine likeness but because they are in
;
truth near to Him, stamped by Him with the mark of the
primary acceptance of the knowledge of His divine illuminated.
By the godhead they are filled with essential knowledge, as it
is among the angels, and with primary insight into the godhead.
Another and clearer [description] of the desig-
nations of the highest orders.
Thrones are honoured [beings]. Lords are those who rule
kingdoms. Princes the governors of the air. Magistrates are
those who rule the peoples and human individuals. Forces are
those whose sight is frightful, viz. who are powerful with strength.
Seraphs are those who sanctify. Cherubs are bearers. Guards1
)
are those who watch. Angels are messengers.
On the first day eight kinds were created, seven in silence,
one by voice, viz. light. On the second day the firmament. On
the third the gathering of waters and the sprouting plants. On
the fourth the different luminaries. On the fifth the fowls, the
reptiles and the fishes. On the sixth the beasts and men.
The form of the whole world is length and breadth. The
head is the East ; the end is the west ; the right part is the
North ; the left part is the South.
The earth is as a bed ; and the highest heaven as a vault
the second heaven as a wheel adaptated to the higher one.
And the borders of heaven and earth are joined one to the
other. The Ocean surrounds them as a belt. Beyond it are
high mountains ascending unto the sky. The sun goes its way
i) rc'i.x^., also a usual term for angels in Syriac.

128 THE OPPORTUNlTlKS OF THE SOUL THAT EfC.
behind these mountains the whole night. The great sea is
beyond them. And this encompasses four times the area of the
dry land and one fourth is dry land.
XXVI
AGAINST THOSE WHO SAY: IF GOD IS GOOD
WHEREFORE HAS HE MADE THESE THINGS?
Sin, hell and death do not at all exist with God. For they
are facts, not persons. Sin is the fruit of will. There was a
time, when it was not. And there will be a time, when it will
not be. Hell is the fruit of sin at some time or other it had
;
beginning; but its end is not known. Death, however, is pro-
vided by the wisdom of the creator. It will rule a certain time
only over nature then it will vanish altogether. Satan is the
;
name of the deviation of will from the truth, but it is not the
designation of a natural being.
Although thou findest, o my brother, some of these things
also in other books, still we may not be reckoned by thee as
those who seek their own glory, because we pretend the work
of others to be our own, but, on the contrary, as those who
are humble, since we suck from the milk of our fore-fathers
those things which we. have collected and placed before our-
selves as objects of contemplation, with the aim of enriching
the intellect with their stores in which we may pasture and
be fed.
For we have not forgotten that we are not above the rank
of disciples so long as we dwell in the flesh. The faculty of
discernment is the emotionality of the natural ideas. When
these go the natural way in their emotions, they meet with
the changing elements and worlds. But when [they go] a sub-
sidiary way, another use will be found for the former ones.
For when the natural [faculties] are twofold in their intellectual
use, they will be understood in one of these only, and that
the non-psychic state.
When thou catchest the delight of the words of the service,
then the mind is eager to remain in it continuously. If thou
desirest, however, to fulfill its wish, then haste towards the
knowledge of its cause. If thou hast attained this quickly, as

AGAINST THOSE WHO SAY: IF GOD IS GOOD KTC. 120
one discerning and not blind, it is not difficult for thee to taste
this [delight] constantly without impediment. And what then is
the influence which is also called cause? By a file, which does
not add anything to it, iron is brought to brilliancy and radiance;
for these properties belong to its essence. But what happens?
The file removes from it the rust, which has come upon it,
although no one is responsible for that. The same theory holds
true as to the nature of the mind. Bring it into contact with
the file ; then thou wilt find how it shines at the time of ser-
vice, imitating the rays of the stars. For a thing is not able
to go its way [without aid] ; it delays, if no one cares for it.
Therefore have I said that during the recitation of Psalms (not
during the prayer of the heart and recitation) the heart can
hardly be captivated. It is otherwise with those ; with them
only small care is needed. They are able to make [recitation
of Psalms] profitable. But without them, care for recitation will
!9' be found to be in vain. The latter will be promoted, even if
there be no other increase to it, if the former be a stock
already present T
).
Hunger is able to procure food ; but it is not inclined to
abstain from eating.
Delicious for the husbandman is the bread won by his sweat.
Without previous sweat, the bread of truth does not give
saturation. The body which is the husbandman, sweats and
feeds the rational mind. And this happens even when the mind
is deprived of its customary, nori-natural food.
Spiritual excellency is the daughter of excellency of will and
this it is necessarily. For freedom is the natural force of reason,
and not slavery. But on that side, towards which it inclines
and where it abides, it gives birth to a different force, which
is not natural. And when this is born, freedom becomes ruled
and governed by compulsion. I dare to say: it becomes bound,
without self-government. Before, compulsion was voluntary; now
compulsion has mastered will.
And I say that this is to be seen on both sides, when a man
subdues himself on the right side and when he gives an oppor-
tunity to the left one. But the mind that has learnt to see discri-
minately, is able to observe how compulsion on both sides domi-
nates freedom, when the force which is not from nature, is born
l) I am not rjuilc certain of the meaning of (lie last sentence
Vcih. Afd. [.ettcrk. 1922 (\VcnMm:k'.

I3O AGAINST TIIO.SK WHO SAY: IF GOD IS GOOD ETC.
from the submission of the will. I do not mean the usual force,
192 which is very difficult; but that which is called secondary.
Custom at any rate is subject to the will; though it strives
to resist it. Apart from this we know two forces ; one subdues
the will the other dominates nature. It has even power to
;
alter nature. That influence dominates nature, is known to those
who have been tested by it.
The varying states of the hearts and the deviating minds
which are usually born from them (free and bound, living and
dead) are promoted to a large extent by the disparity1 of
)
contemplation which rises in human minds, concerning divine
judgments. By the mediation of this disparity the world3 has
)
been preserved for thousands of years. This disparity is largely
helpful towards changing the course of mortal life, and what
is greatest of all, towards the contemplation of judgments
which engender trust in God.
Many hearts as soon as trust has entered them, resemble a
man who has taken deadly poison.
Even to true and veracious sons, with ten parts of love five
parts of fear are mixed together.
Nature liable to deviation is not able to receive here the
perfection of divine truth, or to know the whole will of God
regarding the class of rational beings; even Paul and his equals
are not sufficient for this; till the liability to err has been taken
1) Disparity (r^OAttiAJC r^i , cf. Register) is a term which, as well as its opposite,
often occurs in cognate works, but of which it is not easy to give a clear definition.
Dionysius the Areopagite is well acquainted with the idea (/Vc't>k and x'jitot^^): tv\-j yxp
KVMTGTyTCc e'i ti$ IxXxfia TXt; sv no oh m us twv okorj xpo; ohx b*ix$opxc; 'xxi txCtv[$ »j Sixxtorvvti
(ppovfiiTiy.il, (ty o-uy/^oipoio-x o-vij.jj.iyvj b'/\x e-j ohoic, yevofjevx Ssxrapx^iij-jxt' ^oXxttovcx Si
tm ovtx -xu-jtx xxt' elSot; cxxittov, h w 'ixxtnev ifvxi -rifyvxe (De divinis nominiliHS^ Chapter
VIII). On the other hand, in the ninth chapter, Dionysius argues that hortm is a divine
property, corresponding to some extent with justice; it means that God is not composed
and pervades and reaches the Universe in an equal way.
Going back in literature, we find the terms in the Neo-1'latonists. Of importance is the
following passage in Plotinus {I'lirneaJes III II § XVII): xxi Si) 6 Koyor, 6 -xx- ei$- pipi-
(llTTXl di Ol'X £<£ 'iTX' oiS'J XXi TOV 'KX'JTOC, SlX^.op01 T0TT01 filATlCVQ Xxi %Et'pOVi; XXI \pV%xi 0VX
'itxi ivxpi^arrcvriv oZtuc, toiq olx 'itroii; (ef. also § XVIII and 111 III § 3,5 and Proclus.
Jnstitutio Tlicologka^ cd. Creuzer § VII).
Going further back, we liml tJi.it l'hilo was well acquainted with the ideas of <Wtijs
and ivieroTtji;. Ed. Mangey I 493 sqq. is very instructive. And in the fragments Mangcy
gives the following sentences from l'hilo (II 665): utttsp t&'v TttetorxTw/ xyxQalv to \to-
(J.ETpCJ XITWJ, o'CrU TUV \J.iyITT(tlV XXXUJ V[ 0CjJ.£TpiX, TO-J il^l?.l(J.UTXTOy hCowrx Sut/jo-j ]<J0-
TyfTOi. And — : to xvio-cj ?.v7r^pov xxi Sixo-txtixov ao-rep xxi to <Vcv uhuxo-j xxi o-wSstixov tic,
kj^et.etx-j. 'I'd s-jvofiOM xxi to io-ov sipyjyc a-yrepjjx, xxi auTypixc, x'itiov, xxi t^c, ei$ xttx-ztx
ha.ijj.ojvz. 'Ai/.ToYi/; li xxi Trt.ic-je'it'x 6pjj.viT^p:x 7rof.eit.ov, xxi ?,vtixx tw &tkw.
2) Reading fClSaVs*. in stead of r<i'»A2^\

AGAINST TFIOSK WHO SAV IF (lOD IS fiOOD ETC. I3I
:
193 away, so that nature no longer errs through being aware ofthi—s.
What is parity and disparity? Dispa — rity of contemplation
differences and variations in one soul is the eternal thought
of God being unattainable. Parity is truth being revealed.
If a nature able to err should receive in this world the exact
truth, it would die by the power of its liability to err. This is
' O, depth of the riches' ') and ' How unsearchable are His
judgments' and 'Who has known the mind of God' and the
like, which in an astonishing way and among sighs rise in the
mind from time to time, which by some is called the Cloud.
From this, disparity of contemplation and divergence of in-
sight are born concerning the unattainable inquiry into God's
judgments.
When, however, the perfection of nature will have come, in
a world without deviation, nature will be no longer afraid to
know divine truth, as if it would deviate to the left because
of trust. Trust engenders contempt and profusion ofspirit. Fear,
on the other hand, is wonted to check aberration, so that it
becomes bridled. This fear thou findest in thy soul by the
.
contemplation of the different judgments and worlds and the
disparity of behaviour and the non-correspondence between the
retribution provided to men in this world and the righteousness
which shows itself from time to time, and [God's] constant
194 patience, and the righteous and the sinners, and the contrary
and incongruous meetings of repugnant persons, as ordered
by Providence. When the intellect observes all this, emotion
takes hold of the whole soul. And then is born in it exami-
nation of deliberations, of words and actions and of the out-
lines of the domain of divine righteousness.
Now when the intellect withdraws itself from this and is
exalted unto the unique Essence, by the contemplation of the
properties of that good Nature3 which possesses eternal know-
)
ledge, which is anterior to all existence, and of all His other
properties, fear is expelled at once and the mind is supported
by confidence.
When the intellect descends again from that place and returns
again to the worlds and their distinctions, it will fly and give
way to fear, because Providence does not allow it to be always
in the presence of this contemplation of truth. Therefore from
1) Romans 11,33 2) ("<ll»A viz. Ci'xl

I32 AGAINST THOSE WHO SAY: IF GOD IS GOOD ETC.
time to time [fear] will take away from the heart the strength
of trust which is inspired by true contemplation, and it will
let the intellect be tortured by diverse opinions; lest [the in-
tellect] should desist from judging constantly the veracity of
its deliberations and actions and thus acquire cautiousness, for
it does not know how it will meet the judgment of God. To
whom be praise for ever and ever Amen.
XXVII
IN HOW MANY DIFFERENT WAYS THE SIGHT
195
OF INCORPOREAL BEINGS IS RECEIVED BY
HUMAN NATURE
All simple and subtle kinds of rational bodies can be at-
tained to by the apperception of human nature in three ways:
by personal density [which is a] non-essential way ; by personal
subtlety [which is a] non-essential way ; by true contemplation
which is essential sight.
The first way is dominated by the senses ; the other by
simple psychic sig-ht the third by the natural force of the
;
spirit. Further one is dominated by will and reason ; one by
will and psychic light and all that strengthens the latter.
Will is in the first place cause ; and these are the children
of freedom, even if at the time of use freedom and will are
silent, so long as influence is active and potent. And one only
is dominated by the demonstrating [power], even without the
will of the recipients and essential knowledge, even as the
senses are the recipients of all accidents without the will.
These three ways are ministered by holy forces which mingle
themselves with us for the sake of our instruction and in order
that we may find life. Those who are impure have power to
minister two of them, which they may use when they come
196 near unto us, for perdition, not for profit. To the third kind
they do not approach with the purpose of using- it, so as to
acquire power over us to lead us astray.
For it is not possible for the children of darkness to ap-
proach light the demons do not possess the power to set into
•,
motion the natural insights of the mind. The holy angels,
however, possess this faculty of setting into motion and of

IN HOW MANV DIl'TKRKNT WAYS THE SKI I IT ETC. I33
illuminating. The demons, however, possess the false insights,
the children of darkness, as their power and government. From
the illuminated the recipient takes light, from the dark, dark-
ness. And what is the reason that this was given to those, and
not to these? The insight which every one of these teachers
shows and teaches, is first seen by him in his own person, and
learnt and tasted ; then he is able to transmit to us the truth
of things on account of their true knowledge concerning them,
which they have found first by the swift attaining power of the
light and pure mind. The demons also possess swiftness, but no
illumination. Swiftness is different from illumination. The former
without the latter leads its possessors to destruction and insi-
pidity; the latter teaches truth, the former sham truth; for
light shows the veracity of things entirely and it becomes
greater or less in accordance with behaviour.
From their knowledge the holy angels pour out into us,
through the emotions caused by things, that which they taste
197 and acquire first and thus transmit to us. And these secondary
teachers also set into motion in us, in correspondence with
their knowledge, emotions caused by things. In the domain
where they have no freedom, it is necessary [for them] to
quicken in us right deliberations concerning these things. As
I have said, therefore, this may be certain to thee, that even
if we were able to receive it, they would not be able to teach
us true contemplation, though they should be acquainted with
—
it from of old. Every member of one par — ty or the other • holy
angels or those of the opposite group teaches and incites
us, the disciples, to behave according to his own behaviour.
To me this is true : that the mind of itself, even without the
mediation of the holy angels, tends towards the good, even
without instruction, but that it is unable to receive the know-
ledge of evil things without the mediation of the demons or
the senses, [and is unable] to tend towards them of its own
accord. In our nature good is implanted, evil not. And all that
is foreign and is taught from without, needs an intermediary.
What is planted within, however, unfolds itself naturally, even
without instruction, even if dimly. But even though our nature
tends of its own towards the (rood, it is unable, without the
tutorship of the holy angels, to increase this and to be illu-
We
minated by it. have them as teachers, as they have each
198 other, namely those who are lower [have for their teachers]

134 TN Hmv MANY lilFKKRKNT WAYS TUK SillI IT KTC.
iys those who are more instructed and enlightened than themselves.
So they have each other [for teachers] up to the one who,has
as a teacher the holy Trinity. And even he [does not receive
instruction] of his own, but he has as a teacher the mediator
Jesus, through whom he receives [instruction] and transmits it
to those who are on the same plan and lower.
I think also this. As we naturally do not at all possess the
force to be moved by divine contemplation, and we share in
this deficiency with all heavenly beings, it is only by grace,
without exercise or computation [on our part], that we are
moved by something which naturally is foreign to the human
and angelic mind. For contemplation concerning the godhead
is not to be compared with other kinds of contemplation for
;
we possess contemplation as to their natures through our par-
ticipation in the twofold nature that is theirs, because of that
which is in us and also in them but we do not participate in
;
the nature of the Essence, nor do we possess contemplation
concerning Him. As the faculty of being set into motion by
this contemplation does not naturally belong to any of the
rational beings of the first and middle class, it must be a gift
of grace in all heavenly and earthly minds.
It is not like other faculties caus — ed by nature, howev — er illu-
minated and purified. But I think and this is true that
the mind of us, children of man, is to be conducted [only] by
revelations and insights so far as to reach this essential con-
templation which is the same as true revelation ; without their
199 mediation, however, our mind could not be conducted. And
our mind does not possess a strengh like that of those high
and exalted beings who receive all revelations and contem-
plation from the Essence, without an intermediary. But even
they [receive these revelations] through an image ofthe Essence,
not from the Essence itself. So that our mind also is in the
same degree as the other classes, not able to receive revela-
tions and contemplation of their own, without an intermediary,
but only from Jesus who sways the sceptre of the Kingdom.
The other classes, viz. other primary classes receive [revela-
tions] by handing them down one to the other, concerning all
matters of government and the understanding thereof (not
concerning the Essence), from the first to the second and so
on till the mystery has gone through all the classes.
But many are the mysteries which remain in that one primary

IN liOW MANY LHFFKRKNT WAYS TIIK SKJKT KTC. I35
class without spreading through the other classes, because,
apart from that one, they are not able to receive such a great
mystery. There are other mysteries again which proceed from
the primary class and are revealed only to the second, but
are preserved there in silence the other classes do not per-
;
ceive them. Others again are revealed to the third and fourth
classes. There are also [differences of] superiority and inferiority
of revelation in the case of individual angels. Some of them
200 are rich in revelations and mysteries of a high order are
revealed unto them, and they receive plentiful light. Some are
lower and their impulses are too weak for these mysteries. And
thus among the spiritual classes there is excellency and defi-
ciency, superiority and inferiority concerning the receiving of
revelations. Apart from that upper class which is the primary
of all classes, the remainder without exception receive con-,
templation and hints concerning the entire divine government
from their fellows. And if this is the case with them, how much
less are we able, without them and without an intermediary,
to receive such mysteries. But as often as an apperception
falls in the minds of the saints, this revelation of whatsoever
mystery it be, comes from these [heavenly beings]. When it
is allowed by God, revelation is handed down by each higher
class to that which is lower, unto the lowest; in the same way,
when it is allowed by the godhead, the mystery is handed
down by those who are worthy of it unto human beings.
By their intermediary, at any rate, the saints become receivers
of the light of contemplation, by which they behold the praised
Essence, which is a mystery which they do not learn from each
other. Those (higher beings] are administering spirits, which are
sent to those who are to inherit life through the apperception
of such insights of the truths as are peculiar to them.
201 In the world to be, however, this kind of transmission will
be annihilated. For then one will not receive the revelation of
God's glory for the delight of his soul, from his comrade, but
it will be given to every one himself in so far as is in accor-
dance with the measure of his excellency, and as he is deemed
worthy of by the Lord of the Universe but he will not receive
;
the gift through his comrade, as is the case in this world. For
there are none who learn and none who teach and none who
desire to receive from their comrades what fails themselves.
For one giver reveals himself there without intermediary unto

136 IN HOW .MANY mi-'CKKliNT WAYS TIIK SNIIIT KTC.
all receivers. And those who receive all spiritual delight receive
from Him. So that they do not perceive Him by means of
single insights but by [direct] revelation of Himself, without the
outward intermediary of impulses. There is abrogated the degree
of the learner and the teacher and every one's swift love is
fixed on one.
Also I say that even those who are scourged in Hell are
tormented with the scourgings of love. Scourgings for love's
sake, namely of those who perceive that they have sinned
against love, are more hard and bitter than tortures through
fear. The suffering which takes hold of the heart through the
sinning against love is more acute than any other torture. It
is evil for a man to think that the sinners in Hell are destitute
of love for the Creator. For love is a child of true knowledge
such as is professed to be given to all people. Love works
with its . force in a double way. It tortures those who have
202 sinned, as happens also in the world between friends. And it
gives delight to those who have kept its decrees. Thus it is
also in Hell. I say that the hard tortures are grief for love.
The inhabitants of heaven, however, make drunk their soul
with the delight of love.
Some one was asked when one could believe that he had
been deemed worthy of forgiveness of sins. He answered when
:
he perceives that he inwardly hates them with a complete hate,
and that his mode of life is the contrary of what it previously
was. He who is in such a state, will trust that his sins have
been forgiven by God, on account of the witness borne by the
conscience of his soul, according to the word of the Apostle.
The heart which does not blame is a witness concerning itself.
XXVIII
A SYMBOLICAL DEMONSTRATION CONCERNING
THE THEORY OF SABBATH AND SUNDAY
Sunday is the symbol of true knowledge which is not received
by flesh and blood, and which is elevation above [mere] opinion.
In this world, however, there is no eighth day but neither is
;
there a true Sabbath. The fact that God rested on the seventh
day is a symbol of the rest of our nature from the course of

;
A SYMBOLICAL DEMONSTRATION CONGKRNING K'L'C. I37
this life. For the grave is also of a bodily nature ; it belongs
to this world. Six days are accomplished in the service of life
the seventh is accomplished in the grave the eighth in depar-
;
ting from it. As those who are worthy re — ceive in this world
the mysteries of the Sunday in a symbol they do no — t re-
ceive the day as long as they are in their bodily nature so
203 those who are worthy receive in this world the mysteries of
the Sabbath symbolically, not the true Sabbath which is perfect
rest from wanton influences. God has given us to taste of a
mysterious indication of all things, but He has not decreed that
we should walk here in intercourse with the real truth. For the
real, not the symbolical Sabbath, will happen in the grave, viz.
rest which finishes the torments of the affections and the toil
against them. The whole man gives rest there to the body
together with the soul.
In six days God established the existence of this world and
created the elements ') and connected their existence with the
administration of never resting motion and [ordered] that they
should not rest from their course before their dissolution. And
from the force ofthese, viz. the primeval elements, He has com-
posed our body. He did not give those rest from their motions
;
neither did He grant our body, their offspring, rest from ser-
vice. As the term of our nature He fixed rest, when we shall
follow our first relatives, rest consisting in the dissolution of
life. Thus He said to Adam : In the sweat of thy face thou
shalt eat bread 2 ). Till when? Till thou returnest unto the dust,
for out of it wast thou taken. Thou shalt work in the ground
and it shall bring forth to thee thorns and thistles. This denotes
symbolically that this world is a world of service as long as
it exists.
Our Lord, since the night when He sweated, has changed
this sweat caused by working in the earth which brings forth
thorns and thistles, into the sweat which also rises during
prayer and which man should produce in the service of righ-
204 teousness. For five thousand years He left man to work in
his sweat, for the way of the saints had not yet been revealed,
as the Apostle says. He appeared, however, with His grace
in the latter days and ordered our free will to replace sweat
by sweat. At any rate this change does not show that He
1) rtlOQ^CVjLflDlV, also the planets and zodiacal signs 2) Gen. 3, 19

38 A SVMIiOLICAL DKMONSTRATK>N CONCKRNLNG ETC
I
ordered rest. But He was merciful upon us for the sake
of our long- and weary work in the earth. If, however, we
desist from sweating for this [spiritual service|, we must neces-
sarily reap thorns ; for desisting from this, means the service
of the material earth which brings forth thorns and thistles
according to her nature. In reality the thorns are the affec-
tions which grow in us from bodily seed. As we bear the
image of Adam so we necessarily bear his affections too. The
earth is not free to desist from bearing ; for it brings forth on
account of its nature. The earth is our relative according to
God's witness unto us 'the dust out of which thou wast taken'.
The one [brings forth] thorns; the other, the rational [earth],
affections.
If now our Lord has been a symbolical exam — ple for us in
every respect, viz. in all his different dealings for till the
minth hour Friday He did not take rest from work, not even
from the toilsome work which symbolically represents our whole
—
life; the Sabbath He expected in the grave only where
then are thosex ) who pretend that there is a Sabbath in this
world, viz. rest from affections? Concerning the Sunday, how-
ever, it is difficult to speak. Our Sabbath is the day of the
grave. In reality our nature rests there. So every day it is
205 necessary to eradicate thorns from this earth as long as it
exists. For constant service brings about decrease of weeds.
But even thus the earth does not wholly become pure. If thou
relaxest but a short time in this respect, the weeds will grow
and cover the surface of the earth and choke thy seed and
thy previous work as if it had not existed. Therefore, it is
necessary to purify, every clay ; for a pause in this work pro-
duces a multitude of weeds.
XXIX
ON THK DIFFERENT EXCELLENT METHODS OF
WISE PROVIDENCE IN EDUCATING PUPILS
All wisdom comes from the Lord, as hath been said'2 And
).
we exercise ourselves in our own things in order to become
wise in the dealings of the Lord with us. The Father of truth
1) the Mesalleyanc? 2) Jesus Siiach 1,1

ON Till': BIl'HiKKNT KXCKLLKNT MKTUODS OF KTC. >39
deals iii different ways with his sons ; He avoids uniformity
which consists in showing always the same face, for the profit
of his sons. On the contrary, for the sake of exercise He
withdraws his love. Thus He displays in appearance an order
such as exists not ; but what is, He retains. A wise son recog-
nizes in different attitudes his father's care for him and his
discerning love.
The practice of love appears in two ways when rightly
understood : in joyful events, but also in sorrowful ones. This
proves that love is constantly tending towards the pleasure of
206 its object. But sometimes it makes its object suffer, because of
its fulness-, if it makes suffer, it suffers also itself. It resists
the motions of natural compassion because of the fear of later
harm. Love urges us to participate-, knowledge gives strength
to resist [these] feelings.
Parallel to the differences in its election are the varying
forms of wise love re^ardin^" those who receive its sustenance.
Let us not ask of a wise friend foolish love. He who kills his
son by feeding him with honey, is not different from him that
kills his son with a knife.
It is namely not worthy of the wisdom of love to sustain
its object in a uniform way, the same in health as in illness.
That is to say the variations which depend upon the will in
the choice of the emotions, not bodily changes. If we are able
to choose those [varying] times when we love some one, with
discrimination, especially when such a one is under our com-
mand, is it not then but right that we attribute to God the
faculty of performing the offices of his discriminating love unto
us, even if we do consider them in the same way as the
variations we are able to show to our friends? This is difficult
to bear, as I know myself; but it is profitable nevertheless.
Thy nature which is liable to deviation makes thee in need of
this, if not as a retribution for what has passed, then to excite
in thee fear of what will certainly happen.
Distressing accidents are to the inner education what whole-
some medicines are to bodily disparity.
All that is simple among creatures, is without struggle in its
207 dealings-, this is applicable to bodily as well as to non-bodily
beings. Action is of such a nature that it is only possible in
connection with disparity. Disparity exists only in composite
beings, on account ofa united duality. And though non-composite

1.J.O ON T1IK DIEEERKNT EXCELLENT METHODS OF ETC.
and simple beings are also said to be liable to aberration, still
this takes place wholly to the right side, and not in the way
of action, because they have no experience of that which is
on the opposite side. They are only affectable regarding the
good. For their liability to deviation is checked by swift love;
and where there is love, there is no struggle and no fear. Yet
they are bound in nature and from this being bound, their
;
liability to aberration is said to originate.
Good and evil are the offspring of freedom. Where the
latter is lacking, to practise the former is superfluous with
respect to remuneration. For nature knows no remuneration.
Reward is decreed for strife. There can be no mention ofvictory
where there is no struggle. When opposition is removed, free-
dom vanishes at the same time. Then nature remains without
A
strife. time is reserved for the annihilation of freedom then
;
a limited rationality comes into existence, among men as well
as among the angels. Rationality, not sensible emotionality. In
conception ') rationality possesses two peculiarities, namely two
forces, a rational and a conceiving force. The former is alto-
gether limited. In the latter nature is complete, in so far as
208 it is conceiving. But again it is limited, not compulsorily,
but rather delightfully, with a delightful bond. Sometimes this
[delight] happens unto a few in this world in a symbolical way
•,
but only in trance. Unto the primeval rational beings [this
happened] without trance, as far as this was possible, though
they were not perfect. What was it which happened without
trance unto persons who were not perfect? There are mysteries
that cannot be received before the time appointed. Those per-
sons are imperfect therefore, who do not possess it at all, not
those who possess what they do here possess, only in trance.
Therefore constancy [is necessary], rather than trance. If
trance [at all], then it is for those things which are most ex-
cellent. So trance for those people was an excellent change
;
with us it is annihilation, because of the sickness of the flesh.
1) rC&cu&Uk.o.i*

1
ON THE POWER AND THE KVIE ACTION OK STN ETC. 1 4
XXX
ON THE POWER AND THE EVIL ACTION OE SIN
AND CONCERNING THOSE IN WHOM IT MAINTAINS
ITSELF AND THOSE IN WHOM IT IS ANNIHILATED
A man is not freed from the allurements of sin in his heart
until he hates from [the depth of] his heart and sincerely the
cause of sin. This causes the vehemence of the struggle which
opposes man in the blood and in which his freedom is testified
to through the purity of his love of virtues.
This is the power which is called seduction, by the scent of
which the weak soul is defeated because of its mighty attrac-
tion. This is the strong power of sin by which it troubles the
209 serenity of the chaste and overpowers the pure emotions by
things the knowledge of which they have never experienced.
Here we have to show our endurance, my beloved.
This is the time of the unseen martyrdom in which the
order of the solitaries is said to excel at all times. By the
shock of this war the mind of the steadfast is troubled and
upset, if it is not extremely watchful. Our Lord, who possessest
almighty power, fountain of all help, support Thou in these
times of martyrdom the souls who joyfully have betrothed
themselves to thee, heavenly bridegroom, and who have given
thee the promise of sanctity, in entire purity of emotions without
an afterthought. Fill them with the force which subdues the
resistance of fortresses and of heights that raise themselves
against sanctity, lest they be driven away from their proposed
aim by the unbearable compulsion of this time in which the
struggle in the blood rages.
Not always does this severe strife take place in the struggle
of chastity. Remittance may occur that a test may be applied.
Woe to the weak who is put to the test in this decisive strife.
It possesses great strength and maintains its customary force
against those who have given themselves wholly, even though
it be but once, to defeat, by submitting their deliberations to it.
Be on your guard against idleness, my beloved intelligible
;
death is hidden in it. Without it it is impossible that the soli-
tary should fall into the hands of those who wish to captivate

I42 ON TI1K POWER AND TIIK EVIL ACTION OF SIN ETC.
him. Not that God will judge us on that day on the basis of
210 the Psalms we have recited or whether we have passed in
idleness the times of service occasionally; but by our neglecting
them, the demons win access. And when they have found an
opportunity to enter and have shut our rooms, they accomplish
in us tyrannically things which will necessarily bring their per-
petrators under divine judgment in view of the severe punish-
ment allotted for them. So we become enslaved through negli-
gence in small matters which by the prudent are treated in
a painstaking way, for the sake of Christ. As it has been said:
Whosoever does not subject his will to God, he becomes a
We
slave to his foe. have, therefore, to consider as walls
against those who desire to captivate us, those things which
are reputed to be of a humble nature and which are accom-
plished in the cell, things which by those who maintain the
strict institutes of the church have been laid down in prudence
in a spirit of revelation, for the preservation of our life, the
neglect of which is deemed insignificant by the imprudent, the
harm of which, however, they do not consider. The beginning
and the middle of their path is untrained freedom, which is
the mother of wrongs. To trouble oneself with the care of
small things is better than to give opportunity for sin by re-
missness regarding them. This is freedom at the wrong time;
the end of which is grinding slavery.
As long as thy senses are alive to the shock of every
accident, thy soul is to be deemed dead. For in that case the
flames of sin will never be absent from thy limbs, whatever
be thy states, and no peace will be able to settle in thy soul.
If any of the solitaries promises in his heart to be watchful in
211 such a state, he does not desire to be conscious of punishment.
When a man deceives his companion he deserves the curse,
such as is according to the law. When, however, a man
deceives himself, he is not deserving those punishments; for
while conscious he has made himself unconscious, because it is
demanded from him that he shall eradicate the cause from his
heart. But this is difficult in his eyes; and, for this reason,
while conscious, he desires to be unconscious. O how sweet is
the cause of affections. He will cut them oft sometimes and
be pleased to drive them away. Often he rejoices on account
of their being apeased to eradicate their cause he is, however,
;
not able. Therefore we are put to the test, though it be against

ON THE POWER AND THE EVIL ACTION OF SIN ETC. 143
our will, and are distressed by the affections although we like
that their causes be strong in us.
Sins we desire not; their conductors, however, we receive
with delight; so secondary reasons become a mighty cause of
primary ones. For he who desires the causes of the affections,
is subject to them, though not of his will.
Who hates his sins, abstains from them. He who confesses
his faults, receives forgiveness. There is no abstaining from
customary sins without acquiring hate, nor receiving of for-
giveness without confession of faults. The latter is accompanied
by true humility; the former by grief, through shame rising in
the heart. So long as we have not advanced to the point of
hating blameworthy things, it is not possible to perceive the
foetid odour they spread when perpetrated, nor their stinking
212 smell, bearing them, as we do, in ourselves. So long as thou
hast not cast evil away, thou knowest not what shame thou
wilt foster nor what chastisement will rise from it. If thou seest
in others that with which thou art charged, then thou knowest
the shame with which thou art clad. Remove thyself from evil,
then thou wilt know. For thou inhalest the foetid odour as a
sweet scent, and [considerest] the nakedness of thy shame as
a glorious cover.
Blessed is he that has removed himself from darkness and
seen himself; so long as he is in it, sight and discernment are
impossible. Blessed is he that has come forth from the dizziness
of his wine and has seen in others the shamelessness of his
drunkenness; then he will understand his own shame. As long
as he himself is under the drunkenness of sins, all that he
does is beautiful in his eyes. When nature has deviated from
its order, it is all alike, to be drunk with wine or with desires;
both [states] remove [a man] from what is becoming ; both
excite in their bearer, the body, the same heat they are dif-
;
ferent as to their idea, but one in appearance and one in
;
madness. There is no equality in their causal ideas; but in
their bearers there is no diversity.
All rest is followed by vexation and all vexation by rest.
;
If all in this world is liable to change, nevertheless man under-
goes it in an attitude of opposition, either here or there or at
the time of departure. This is especially the case with rest
2'3 from lasciviousness or vexation which precedes it, in the way
of sanctity. This is administered by God with compassion, so

144 ON TIlF POWER AND THIS EVIL ACTION OF SIN ETC.
'
that man has to taste this torment either on his way or at
its end then he passes away. And on account of the richness
;
of God's compassion He [uses] this as a means of remuneration,
like a deposit- so that the wages of good do not diminish the
capital but the wages of evil do.
;
As has been said : He who is chastised here, diminishes [his
torments in] Hell.
Beware of freedom preceding subjection, beware of consola-
tion preceding strife. Beware of knowledge older than the shock
of temptations ; beware of it rather than of love preceding the
accomplishment of repentance.
If all of us are sinners, and none is exalted above their
experience, then none among the virtues precedes repentance.
Recollect that all delight is secondary to aversion and bitterness.
Beware of joy also, to which is not joined variation without
cause. Concerning all things provided from above thou wilt
find the cause of their variation unattainable to knowledge.
Fear that which is reputed to be joined with equality ; it is
said to lie besides the way which is trodden. He who knows
to steer the ship of the world with prudence, has connected
variation with all that belongs to Him. Different from this is
likeness.
Distraction of the thoughts is connected with the rest of
the limbs dejection with immoderate labour distraction with
; •,
dejection. Distraction differs from distraction. The former is
!«4 accompanied by the strife of wantonness; the latter by the
inclination to leave the cell and to [inhabit] various places.
Moderate labour connected with constancy is priceless ; where
it fails, there is exuberant desire; where it prevails, there is
room for trouble.
Bear the folly of nature prevailing in thy body, o brother,
because thou art destined to possess that wisdom which pos-
sesses the everlasting crown of government. Be not troubled
by the disturbance of the body, [the inheritance] of Adam,
which is destined as soon as it is clad with that heavenly
image which is the king of peace, to dwell in that delight of
which the knowledge would overpower in this world the minds
of those who are clad with flesh.
Be not troubled on account of the wild variations of nature.
For the short duration of the labour caused by them is, to him
who endures, as a delightful gift. They are hounds accustomed

ON THE POWER AND THE EVIL ACTION OF StN ETC. I4.5
to the butcherl ) ; a sound from the mouth is sufficient to make
them flee. But if thou shouldst condescend to have connections
with them, thou wouldst make them strong lions.
Despise mean pleasures, lest thou become subjected to the
A
force of their heat '). little patience regarding small things
repels the danger of the approach of large ones. It is not
possible to overcome great evils without a small victory over
trifling ones.
Recollect the kind of way thou wilt go, o brother ; there is
no longer life there sustained by chemicals driving mortality
•,
nor warmth of temperament exciting the young nature by the
allurement of its pleasure. Bear the labour of the struggle into
which [HeJ has introduced thee in order to put thee to the
test; then thou wilt take the crown and pass; for after a little
r5
time thou wilt have rest from this world. Think of that rest
without end, of that life without allurements, of that state of
perfect manhood, of that course of life without shocks, of that
compulsory force of divine love reigning over nature.
XXXI
THE STRUGGLE OR RATHER THE DANGER OF
FALLING THAT EXCELLENT WORKS INCUR
It is not possible to vanquish the bad deliberations that
accompany the bodily allurements ; or rather it is hardly
possible. They have been called by some a double weapon
[directed] against us. There is no rest from them as long as
there is satiety of bread, water and sleep, and access to the
things that cause emotions by their accidental character. It is
better to depart life than to bear shame in it. When we are
anxious to fulfill our duties, the influence of the flesh will be
extinguished from our limbs.
It is not possible to have care for apperceptible things and
to correct our personal affections [at the same time). For
without affectionate beseechings and constant bending [of the
knees] it is not possible to draw [divine] compassion towards
1) viz. the butcher's shop
2) when it has grown strong
Verh. Afcl. Letteik. 192* (Wunsiiick)

;
146 THE STRUGGLE OR RATHER THE DANGER OF ETC.
us and thus it is necessary to practise them constantly. With-
;
out painstaking in small things it is not possible to escape
great evils.
XXXII
ON THE AIM OF GUARDING THK HEART AND ON
2.6
SUBTLE SPECULATION THAT LOOKS INTO THE
APARTMENT
Let there not be hidden to thy knowledge the power that
lies in spiritual songs, when we use it with understanding. For
it turns the deliberation away from the world. It also drives
distraction from the mind, though it is reputed to be useful
for children (only]. The unsteady mind profits by it at once.
Spiritual allurements arc more valuable against the affections
than the force of knowledge. When thou art alone, guard thy
heart by them if thou possessest not yet the force to be
watchful in thy being, through contemplation which i—s familiar
intercourse with t — he knowledge of discernment; or if this
is not [sufficient] by the constant recollection of the depar-
ture from the body and by the recollection of things expected
and hoped for; this must be accompanied by [the fulfilling of|
the duties which cause delight, namely the withdrawal from
:
things which cause emotions, and the little observances within
the cell. If, after long slavery, thou findest that thy harbour
is to be reached with freedom, pursue it [in this way]. If thou
seest that this is a foolish method, combine it with [the practice
of] the law. I'or here it is easy to be rectified.
While with these and such variations thou advanccst with
—
insight, in a ship loaded with the treasures of the ce—ll a
great festival full of the marchandise of the virtuous then
look with subtlety at the unequal children which are born to
thee from apperceptive variations. Thou wilt namely see how
every spiritual delight is preceded by the pains of the cross
217 how the pleasure of sin, however, is born from bodily comfort;
[and thou wilt see] why in the harbour of chastity, spiritual
love is caused by spiritual contemplation, which heals the mind.
There is nothing secondary without a preceding cause, nor a
third virtue without a foregoing one. Thou wilt find orowine

ON TttK AIM OF GUARDING THK HEART ETC. I47
in the womb of chastity the wings with which the mind ascends
unto divine love, in which one may venture to approach the
cloud.
This insight will give a man a considerable force, so as to
mingle watchfulness with his affairs, and incitement unto zealous
efforts.
Behaviour without eyes will prove idle. For it quickly brings
about dejectedness on account of distraction. Pray our Lord
that He endow thy behaviour with eyes. Then joy will begin
to sprout then troubles will become sweet to thee as honey
;
comb then thou wilt think thy enclosure a festival chamber.
;
It is not possible to vanquish the affections without apper-
ceptive virtues, nor fortuitous distraction without intercourse
with spiritual knowledge. Our mind is an agile thing •, if it is
not bound to an object with discernment, it will not cease to
be distracted. And if the antecedents have not been fulfilled,
there is no room for such a process. For there is no peace
without victory over the enemies. And if peace does not reign,
jhow is it possible] to find that which lies beyond peace?
Affections are the fence of hidden virtues. If they are not
vanquished first by the manifest virtues, it is not possible to see
218 what lies within them. For it is not possible for one standing
without a wall, to speak about what is within. It is not possible
to see the sun in a cloud, nor the natural virtues of the soul
among the trouble of perpetual affections.
Pray God that He may give thee to perceive spiritual allu-
rements. If these take hold of thy soul the world will depart
from thee and thou from the world. But they cannot be per-
ceived without solitude and emaciation and attentive intercourse
with recitation. Without the latter thou must not pray for the
former. If thou prayest for the former without [these virtues],
they will change quickly and become of a bodily nature. Who
is able to understand, will understand. It has pleased the wise
Lord that we should eat this bread with sweat not for malig-
;
nity, but lest we should be attacked by a malady of the
stomach and die.
Every virtue which is the mother of a second, which is
anterior to it, is a viper to the souls of those who find it, it
they do not cast it from them quickly.

*4<^ oN T"K ACTION OF DIVINE LOVE
XXXIII
ON THE ACTION OF DIVINE LOVE
Now that we have written the above *) about spiritual allu-
rements, it is time to explain [this ideaj. It is a dim power
which arises from love in the heart, at first without sensible
causes, for it sets in motion the temperament, without personal
vision or practical understanding or reasoning. And therefore
it is thought to be without cause, because the mind is still
vague.
2l<> This is its impression on the untrained. To the perfect the
cause is revealed later, in connection with examination of
it ; and then the [impression] is still stronger, for delight is
moving in the heart. A part of it is reserved in the body by
the recipient ; and another part is sent to the psychic forces.
For the heart is in the middle between psychic and bodily
apperceptions ; to the former it belongs organically, to the
latter naturally. And the recipient directs the taste of its action
towards both sides. Therefore the world is compelled to depart
from it as it itself departs from the things of the world. We
must necessarily inquire into the cause [of this phenomenon].
Love is something hot by nature. And when it alights on any
one without measure, it renders that soul as it were mad.
Therefore the heart that perceives it, cannot contain and bear
it without unusual excessive variations becoming manifest in it.
And these signs it publishes in an apperceptive way, openly:
at once the face becomes reddy and joyous, the body grows
hot ; fear and bashfulness are thrown away and it becomes as
it were wanton-, the power of concentration flees; impetuosity
and disturbance reign. His own life forthwith is estimated as
nothing in comparison with his Friend. Therefore even death,
which was more dreadful to him than any thing, is the same
to him as pleasure. And with all this, the gaze of the mind
is not free from fantastic thoughts on Him. Afar, he speaks
with Him as with one who is near. His knowledge inquires
into the hidden state of Him who is concealed from sioVht. His
1) End of chapter XXXII

ON THK ACTION OK DIVINIS LOVE I49
220 gaze is natural and hostile to sensual apperception. In his
actions, as in his sight, he is enflamed. He dwells in solitude,
and deliberation entertains itself as it were with a partner and
is stupefied.
This passion has enebriated martyrs and, driven by it, apostles
have travelled through the whole earth in trance, the saints
have been tormented, have suffered derision and were erring
in the wilderness. Composed, they have become deranged wise,
;
they have wilfully become foolish; bashful, they have become
wanton with discernment; exempt from affections [they have
walked] in the flesh. Constantly demanding, they have become
quiet without compulsion. May we be worthy to reach their
madness by the compassion of our adorable God. Amen *).
If thou considerest thyself as having peace from the assault
of the affections, before thou hast entered the town of humility,
do not trust this. There is some ambush prepared for thee.
Expect, after this peace, great trouble from them. While pas-
sing along all the apartments of virtues, thou wilt not find rest
221 from thy tribulations nor relief from thy persecutors, till thy
course will have reached the apartment of humility.
XXXIV
ON THE NATURAL CHILDREN OF VIRTUES AND
THE LIKE
Asceticism is the mother of saintliness from it is born the
;
taste of the first apperception of the divine mysteries and it
is called the first period of spiritual knowledge. That no one
deceive himself and become a false prophet. For the impure
soul does not ascend to the pure kingdom, neither in the
symbolical nor in the common sense, and it cannot mingle
with the holy spirits. But when the elements have mingled
with their relatives, the distinction of the natural unity being
1) In the text there follows: "who has taken a mediator from our race and gi^en us
these things through his hand; who was in all points tempted like as we are, yetwithout
sin (Hebrews 4, 15). On account of the equality of his natural flesh with ours, eternally
without mixture, in the unity preserving the properties of the natures, He has made him-
self worthy of sitting to the right hand. Therefore praise and power and adoration to
Him, now and in life without end for ever and ever''. The passage is lacking in the
Greek translation and looks like a Nestorian addition.

I50 ON TIIK NATURAL CHILDREN OF VIRTUES ETC.
preserved, that miserable (soul) will be preserved for the great
future judgment.
Keep pure, o brother, the beauties of thy chastity, by tears
and fasting and sitting alone by thyself. When the right course1
ofthe natural sphere has been finished and [the soul| has reached
that great luminary, which supports the spheres of the stars
multitudinous in their personal distinctions, as Paul says in
order to prove — the future resurrection, and when it has — mingled
with its rays I do not mean in the natural sense then
the vehicle of the will shall be bound with the bonds of un-
consciousness and the two exuberant fountains will dry up in
their basins. And then the priests will leave the sanctuary on
222 account of the cloud of God's majesty T At that time the
).
king of Israel will be Solomon, viz. that peace which is born
from humility, he will build a house for the Lord and com-
pletely provide it with all the sacred vessels.
A
little trouble for God's sake is more excellent in God's
eyes than much service without suffering. Because trouble borne
from free will is a manifestation of love. Service in comfort,
however, rises from inward satiety. Therefore by troubles, not
by service with satiety the saints were tested concerning the
love of Christ. Service without labour is the righteousness o[
lay people who wish to be justified on account of what they
possess, but do not acquire excellency in their person.
Thou, however, who art victorious, taste the suffering of
Christ in thy person, that thou also mayest be deemed worthy
of tasting His glory. For if we surfer with Him, we shall also
be glorified with Him. The mind cannot be glorified with Jesus,
if the body does not suffer for Jesus. He who despises glory
will receive glory at the same time. He will be glorified in his
body as well as in his soul. The glory of the body is humble
subjection before God. The glory of the mind is true con-
templation concerning God. Right subjection is twofold; it
follows from labour and from disdain so that when the body
;
suffers, the heart also suffers with it.
If thou doest not know God, it is not possible that His love
should be excited in thee. It is not possible for thee to love
God, if thou hast not seen God. Thou seest Him as soon as
223 thou knowest Him. Sight is not prior to knowledge. Make me
1) Allusion to 1 Kings 8, 11

ON TI1K NATURAL l'I IILDKEN OF VIKTUKS ETC. 151
worthy of knowing- Thcc, my Lord, then I .shall love Thee
too. [1 do not desire] that knowledge which arises amidst dis-
tractions of the mind, in the training of instruction. But make
me worthy of that knowledge by which the mind, while gazing
at Thee, will be glorifying thy nature gazing with that gaze
;
which banishes from the mind the apperception of the world.
Make me worthy of becoming exalted above arbitrary sight
from which come phantastic thoughts, so that I gaze at Thee
by the compulsion of the bonds of the cross, the latter half
of which is the crucifixion of the mind whose position of free-
dom is annihilated by the service of the impulses, with that
gaze which nature gives not, but is constantly directed towards
Thee. Place in me the pure metal of Thy love, so that, fol-
lowing Thee, I become alienated from the world. Move in me
the understanding of Thy humility by which Thou hast lived
in the world clad with the cover taken from our limbs, that
by the constant and never weakening remembrance of it I may
accept with delight the humiliation of my nature.
Two are the parts of the ascension on the cross. One is the
crucifixion of the body. The second is the ascension unto con-
templation ; but the former is a matter of freedom; the latter
of influence.
The mind will not be subjected, if the body is not sub-
jected. The reign of the mind is the crucifixion of the body.
The mind is not subjected unto God, if freedom has not been
subjected to reason.
It is hard to trust an elevated matter to boyish rank. For
woe to thee, (..) town, when thy king is a child -).
He who subjects himself, nearly all will be subjected unto
him. He who knows himself, the knowledge of all things will
224 be given him. The word ,know thyself means the accomplish-
ment of all knowledge. As all is encompassed in thy being,
so in the knowledge of thy being all knowledge is encom-
passed, and in the subjection of thy being, the subjection of
all the world. At the time when humility dominates thy be-
haviour, thy being will be subjected to thee, and with it every-
thing, because in the heart a divine peace will be born. As
this has not yet happened to thee, thou art perpetually per-
secuted not only by the affections, but also by accidents. Verily,
1) Ecclesiastes 10, 16.

152 ON THE NATURAL CHILDREN OK VIRTUES ETC.
O Lord, if we do not humble ourselves, thou ceasest not to
humble us. True humility is the offspring of knowledge right
;
knowledge the offspring of temptations.
XXXV
A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS CON-
CERNING CONSTANT BEHAVIOUR AND EVERY KIND
OE EXCELLENCE WHICH EMINENTLY USEFUL
IS
FOR THOSE WHO HAVE STRIPPED OFF THE WORLD
AND DWELL IN THE WILDERNESS, FOR RECLUSES
AND FOR THOSE WHO IN VOLUNTARY MORTIFI-
CATION AT ALL TIMES EXPECT THE CROWN OF
RIGHTEOUSNESS
The disciple says: Which are the bonds captivating the
mind [and withholding itj from running after evil things?
The teacher says: The constant search after wisdom and
desire for the teachings of life. For bonds stronger than these
against the unruliness of mind do not exist.
The disciple says: Where is the limit of the course of
225 wisdom for those who seek it, and where does the course of
teachings end?
The teacher says: The way of this course is foreign to any
limit, to such an extent that even the holy angels do not reach
perfection. The course of wisdom is without end. It ascends
to such a height that it mingles with God him that follows it.
And even this is a sign of its unlimitedness, that its distinc-
tions are without end; wisdom is God.
The disciple: What is the first and principal way leading
towards wisdom?
The teacher: That a man seeks God with all his might
and that he is quick in seeking Him with his whole person,
so that he even does not dislike to give up and throw down
his life on account of his love.
The disciple. To whom is it becoming to be called a man
of understanding?
The teacher. He that really understands that there is a limit
to his earthly life, is also able to put a limit to his sins. What
knowledge or understanding is greater than this, that a man
has wisdom to depart this life without harm, while his limbs are

;
A TRKATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. I53
are not strained with the odour of desires, nor his soul with the
filth of their sweetness? If a man subdues his impulses in order
to penetrate into the mysteries of all classes of beings, and is
filled with insight into all kinds of knowledge, so to say, yet his
soul is defiled by the filth of sin so that he cannot hope on
account of the wit — ness of his soul that he shall safely reach the
harbour of trust then there is none more foolish among the
creatures than such a man who, though being constantly occupied
226 by his works, is brought by them to the hope ofthis world only.
The disciple. Who is really strong ?
The teacher. He that during the temporary troubles bywhich
the glory of his victorious power is hidden, does not long after
the comfort by which a shameful life is enveloped and which at
all times compels those who find it, to drink the goblet ofsighs.
The disciple. Is it harmful to his course towards God,
if a man makes a pause is his labour?
The teacher. It is not possible for a man to come near to
Christ without troubles, nor can his righteousness be preserved
unchanged without them. When righteousness already acquired
is bereft of labours which served to augment and at the same
time to guard it, it resembles a treasure which of a sudden
finds itself without guardians, or an athlete who is stripped of
his arms while a host of enemies surrounds him or a ship
;
that is left in the ocean without the utensils of her equipment
or a garden rich in fruits from which is cut off the fountain
that watered it.
The disciple. Who is the illuminated in his impulses?
The teacher. He who is able to understand the bitterness
hidden in the sweetness of the world and who withholds his
mouth from drinking its goblet. Who zealously enquires after
the salvation of his life and who does not cease from running,
up to the day on which he is freed from the world ; who
shuts the gates of his senses, lest the love of the world enter
and dwell within him and bereave him of his hidden treasures.
The disciple. What is the world and how can we recog-
227 nize it and how can it do harm to those who love it?
The teacher. The world is a whore and by the desire of
its beauty it attracts those who see it so that they love it. And
he that during a short time has been entangled in its love
is not able to escape from its hands, before it has stripped
him even of his life and sends him from its house through

;
154 A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC.
death, bereaved of all. But a man recognizes it as soon as he
endeavours to leave its darkness. Then he is able to see the
many cords of its nets. As long as he is in it, he cannot see
its ensnarements. For it is not only its disciples and sons and
captives which are within its fortress, but also the renunciators,
ascetics and th — ose who have once broken its bonds and were
once above it those also it now gradually begins to entangle
in its service, making them litter for its feet.
The disciple. Now that thou hast convinced me of the
fact that the world really suffocates those who dwell in it and
of how difficult it is to understand its artificial bonds, I beg to
learn first, what is the first impulse to the mind's doubt con-
cerning the world, since its bonds are so very sweet and the
schemes of its fetters are hidden?
The teacher. When the deliberation of the love of his
soul awakens in him, this impulse of deliberation begins to make
the world hated in his eyes and it throws into him doubt
concerning
it.
22S The disciple. Whence comes this emotionality which brings
about that which appeared always praiseworthy and beautiful,
now suddenly appears as ugly, so that he repents his life and
his previous knowledge, thinking that he did not think rightly
concerning the world ?
The teacher. In the first place it is nature which beakoning
to him in silence, awakens in him the critical impulse as to the
unstable duration of the world and of the future and of its
course and as to the ephemere nature of those who enter into
;
it, so that he considers this world as a place of transition for
those who enter into it; as also for the many generations
before him, the number of which is unlimited. They have
entered it as an inn for a night and left it as travellers on a
journey over the whole earth, without thinking of return. Some
of them kings, some governors, some wise, some honoured.
Some of them scribes, some orators, some judges, some com-
manders of armies. Some of them possessors of riches, some
lords of goods. And now after their death there is neither the
order of their degrees, nor the crowns of their government
nor their dreadful thrones, nor their lordly pleasures, nor the
praise of those who honoured them, nor the love oftheir friends,
nor the luxuriant pleasures of their bodies, nor the comely beauty
of their grace, nor their proud majestic stature, nor their erudite

A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. I55
mind, nor their spirit rich in impulses, nor the rich effusions
229 of the Gihon of their learning which streamed from their mouth
and captivated by its grace the heart of the hearers.
They have slept in Sheol for long" years as if it were one
night. And it is not known how many years they yet have oi
this long sleep, nor when the dawn of resurrection will rise
for them and awaken them from their slumber. And to consider
for what purpose they are left in this state, causes great suf-
fering; and he will think of how many generations are cloistered
under this earth, forgotten [now]. And I too will pass as any
one of them. Cursed be riches and comfort. And under this
deliberation, great confusion will arise in his heart and his
spirit will be filled with suffering. And on account of the seve-
rity of suffering he will pour forth tears in great sorrow. Then
he will despise the world and bewail his life and lament over
his soul with various bitter lamentations. And with sighs he
will say to himself: Where wilt thou be, my miserable soul
and where wilt thou find thyself after my death? Perhaps even
this deliberation will rise in him : Would I had not entered
the world of creatures and I had not left the womb !
In this kind of lamentation he will shed sweet tears because
of the sorrow of his heart, and moisten his garments with his
tears. And forthwith this world will be in his eyes as a prison
and its first sweetness will be more bitter than any bitter thing
and the love of his life and its desirable beauty will seem the
type of hell.
Then his mind will turn to scripture which will awake in
230 him faith in the resurrection and the end awaiting all the
things of this world, and in the promises given to those who
have lived well in the world and the divine judgments threa-
tened against the transgressors of the law and against those
who, during their short lifetime have lived in the broad way
of sin. And then, as one who has discovered some light, he
throws away the burden of sorrow, and great joy is awakened
in him, because he has found a hope, excellent and true.
These things and the like, nature is not able to prompt from
his inward emotion they are understood from the words of
:
scripture by faith alone. Man is not able to acquire instruction
concerning himself wholly from nature and from the critical
impulses which are within him. Concerning the dealings of God
in the Past and in the Future we are able to earn this in-

I56 A TREATISK IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWKRS ETC.
struction from the scriptures or from spiritual revelation. Then
by the rays of faith and scripture the eye of the spirit will be
enlightened and the natural critical faculty will radiate and
man will be incited to care for his soul. And further he will
think of means to make his life free from the world, so that,
before departing the body, he will be able to prepare for him-
self provisions useful for the world to be.
The disciple. How can man wholly give up the world?
The teacher. By desire ofthe future good that is recollected,
which divine scripture sows in his heart with the sweetness of
its words full of hope. When the things that are thought to
be glorious and delightful and in which man is entangled, are
not contrasted with the desire of still more excellent things,
231 the spirit is not able to despise its former love.
The disciple. But nature is weak and not able to give up
suddenly all its former customs and embrace a life of troubles.
The teacher. If the greatness of the future life does not
cause a mans spirit in the greatness ofwisdom to compare it with
the miserable shortness of this temporal life, it is not possible
for him to take heart to bear troubles in order to begin his
course on the way of the new world. Pray, compute in thy
mind the number of years of this our place and elevate thyself
as much as possible, and compare it with the days of the
future world, and say whether that which thou givest is equal
to what thou wilt receive.
And considering what thou leavest and what thou wilt
,
receive in stead of it, say whether thy exchange is an equal
one. Therefore the wise, while he wonders at the greatness of
that world and its unlimited life over against the shortness of
temporal life, will say : The number of man's days if he lives
long, are a hundred years : )-, this is like filling a bucket from the
sea or taking one corn of sand. A thousand years in this world
is not as much as one day in the world of the righteous 2 ).
The disciple. And what shall we do with the body ? As
soon as it is surrounded by distress, the desire of the will
towards the good is relaxed as well as its former zeal.
232 The teacher. This will usually happen to those the half
of whose being has sought God, whereas the other half has
remained in the world. This means that their heart is not yet
1) Cf. Vs. 90, to 2) Cf. Ps. 84,11

A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. 157
free from earthly things, but they are in doubt, sometimes
looking behind, sometimes forward; and I think that the sage
admonishes those who approach the way of God in this state
of indecision, saying: Do not approach it doublehearted, but
approach it as one who sows or as one who reaps. And our
Lord, seeing that among those who wish to renunciate com-
pletely, there are some in such a state of mind, that their will
is ready but their thoughts are drawn backwards by fear of
troubles, on account of their love of the body which they have
—
not yet thrown away He will take from them this lassitude
of mind saying to them briefly : If any man will come after
me, let him first deny himself1 ). What is the denial that is
spoken of here? It is the denial of the flesh. And one who is
destined to suffer crucifixion, he accepts the thought of death,
and goes forth, as one who does not think that he has any
further share in this life. This is [what is meant by] taking up
the cross and following me. The cross denotes the will prepared
for any trouble. And declaring why this is so, Me says: Who-
ever will save his soul in this world, will lose it in the true
233 life2 ). And whoever will lose his individuality here for my sake,
will find it there. This means : he that sets his steps on the
way of crucifixion and yet still cares to think of this bodily
life, bereaves his soul of the faith for which to suffer he is
gone out. Because this thought does not allow him to approach
trouble; but, being always with him, allures him gradually and
makes him leave the centre of the struggle for blessed life.
Such thoughts grow in him till they have overpowered him.
But he whose mind has complied with the loss of his self for
the sake of finding the love of Me, he will be preserved,
without harm, for life everlasting. This is, he who gives up
his life for my sake will find it'.
This means : make free thy soul as it were from thyself and
prepare it for a complete loss of life. If the departure from
this life finds thee in this state of mind, I will give thee life
everlasting, according to my promise. And if thou perseverest in
this life, I will show my promise in thee later as a confirmation
of the future goods. Therefore, thou wilt find that immortal
life when thou despisest temporal life. If thou enterest the
strife with such a preparation, all that was most sorrowful and
1) Matthew 16,24 2) Matthew 10,39

58 A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS ANl) ANSWERS ETC.
1
difficult, will be contemptible in thy eyes. The preparation of
such a will even is not a struggle for his life in his mind,
234 even when peril of death threatens him. In short: If a man
does not hate his temporal life, because of love of the future
life, he cannot bear troubles.
The disciple. In what way can a man cut off his former
customs and accustom himself to a life o[ privation?
The teacher. The body is not to be persuaded to live in
need, so long as it is surrounded by things o{ luxury and
relaxation. For the sight of [worldly] things, theirsplendourand
existence kindles in it a desire for them. Therefore justly our
Saviour has commanded those who follow Him, in the first
place to renunciate and to leave the world. First He frees
them from the causes of relaxation then He commands them
;
to begin work. And our Lord himself, when He began His
strife with the Devil, combated him in the dry and desert
wilderness. And Paul also commands those who bear the
cross of Christ to leave the town. So we will leave the town
with Him, bearing his disdain, which He also suffered without
the town.
By the abandonment of the world and what belongs to it,
man easily forgets his former customs and his trouble will not
last a long time. But the coming near to [worldly] things
easily relaxes the fervour of the spirit. It is also becoming and
very profitable in the strife, that a man's life be ordered with
the utmost privation and indigence, free from all things that
235 excite [the desire ofj comfort. When thus the causes leading
towards relaxation are removed from man, he will not be
tormented by the double strife, the outward and the inward one.
Lo, how much easier is the strife if the things a man desires are
afar off and not near, alluring the thoughts by their aspect.
Thus we see that there is a double strife. When a man's
way of life is poor and his wants are small, he will not look
with desire at these things even when indigent and he will
content his body with little, because even the body is despised
and contemptible in his eyes and he does not approach unto
;
it because of its beauty and the pleasure it gives, but only in
order to sustain nature.
These ways easily lead man to asceticism, without harm and
strife and deliberations. It is becoming for a man to refrain
from the sight of those and to remain far from those things,

A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS ANt> ANSWERS ETC. 159
against contact with which he can be on his guard only with
a great effort. This I do not say in view of things of the belly
only, but also in view of those things which by their temptation
put to the test the solitary's freedom and the avoiding of-
which he has promised in his bond with God. So I mean also
the sight of a woman's face, the sight of superb things, superb
persons and their luxury, splendid persons and their garments,
all things belonging to worldliness also speaking and hearing
concerning them. For the affections possess a strong power,
236 when [worldly] things are near, to weaken the stragglers and
to turn aside their mind. If the sight of beautiful things spurs
on the mind to follow their service with zeal, it is well known
that also those which are the contrary of beautiful, have the
power of captivating the mind. And if further harm does not
happen than that the quiet mind is cast into strife, there is
this loss at any rate, that a man by his own will is thrown
from peace into perturbation.
If one of the saints, an industrious father, thought the sight
of a man with a womanlike face a harm for the mind and
an injury in the strife, when once he approached one of the
convents, who then should neglect other [dangers] for this
;
blessed man was not to be persuaded even to enter and pro-
strate himself there. This wise father deliberated with insight
thus: 'if it should come to my memory even only in the night
I pass here, that there is here such a thing, this would be a
great loss'. And therefore he did not enter the convent. ' I
am not afraid, my brethren' [he said]. 'But wherefore useless
strife'? This means, that even such recollections hinder the
serenity of my service.
For all the things which belong to this body and against
which a man must guard himself by a great effort, will cause
him little strife as long as they are at a distance from him.
Thus even when they are near, so long as a man uses the
pleasant things [of this world] with fear, he desires their proxi-
mity only because of the use which is in them.
We
237 see that many roots are buried and hidden under the
earth, of which no one has any knowledge as to their existence
while it is summer, because of the force of the sun and the
strength of heat. But when the raindrops reach them and the
influence of the fragrant air, then all of them suddenly begin
to show themselves whereever they are buried. Doest thou not

:
160 a Treatise in questions and answers etc.
see, that by the strong heat of asceticism and the rays of the
grace of solitude, the affections leave thee in quiet ; but if thou
approachest the things [of the world], thou shalt see that all
of them are quickened and thrust up their heads from their
places, that is : if they smell just a little of the odour of
comfort.
These things I have said in order to show that no one
should have confidence before he dies and departs this life and
how helpful in our strife flight and withdrawal from the world
are. Those things which we are ashamed to recollect secretly,
we must also fear to meet. And we may not tread clown the
heart and despise conscience. For in a lonely place without
contact [with the world] we have to examine our body in order
to acquire training in endurance.
There is also another thing, more important than the rest
namely as often as that which is a cause of strife, is afar from
a man, even if he be vexed in mind he will not fear that,
vanquished by desire, he might employ it on account of its
being near.
238 The disciple. If a man has thrown away all impediments
and has entered the arena, what is the beginning of his strife
against sin, and where does he start fighting?
The teacher. This much is known to every one, that all
strife against sin and its desires is to be preceded by the labour
of fasting, especially if one is combating inward sin. And the
token of hate against sin and its desires, visible in those who
are engaged in this invisible strife, is this that they begin with
fasting.
Afterwards conies standing during the night. He that during
his whole life loves the use of fasting, is a friend of chastity.
As at the root of all the boons of the world and of all its
evils, is sexual pleasure and the relaxation of sleep which in-
cites to impure cohabitation, so the beginning of the holy way
of God and of all virtues, is founded upon fasting and strict
punctuality in the service of God, with the crucifixion of the
body during the whole night in the strife against the pleasure
of sleep.
Fasting is a strengthening of all the virtues, the beginning
of the struggle, the crown of the Naziraeans, the beauty of
virginity and sanctity, the preservation of chastity, the beginning
of the way of Christianity, the father of prayer, the fountain

1
A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. 16
of placidity, the teacher of quiet, and the forerunner of all
good qualities. As the delight of light belongs to sound eyes,
239 so the desire of prayer follows fasting with discernment. For
as soon as a man begins to fast, his mind forthwith will be
desirous of intercourse with God. A fasting body cannot endure
lying on its bed during the whole night. For fasting naturally
excites vigilance unto God not only by day, but also during
;
the night. And the empty body of him that fasts does not
grow fatigued in the struggle against sleep. And though his
senses are weak, his mind is awake unto God in beseechings.
It is better to neglect service for weakness caused by fasting,
than on account of indolence caused by food.
To dwell at length upon the beauties of fasting is not ne-
cessary. Many of the teachers and fathers have spoken about
the victories of fasting and the many beautiful things origina-
ting in it. And all books inform us concerning the importance
of fasting and the victories it has given generation after gene-
ration, and concerning the mighty help afforded by it, and the
high praise deserved by those who fast. And by experience it
is known to every one, that it is the fountain of all good
[qualities].
As long as the seals of fasting are on a man's mouth, his
mind meditates on the soul's penitence, his heart sends forth
prayers and his face is dark with sadness. Evil impulses are
afar from him ; neither is gladness seen on his brow at all. For
he is an enemy of desires and idle occupations. There has
never been seen a man who was fasting with discernment who
was subjected to evil desire. For fasting is a storehouse of all
virtues. And he that despises it, makes all virtues totter.
240 As the first commandment imposed upon our nature in the
beginning was against the tasting of the food, and in this
point the head of our race fell, therefore those who strive for
the fear of God begin the building there where the first injury
originated, when they begin the task of keeping His command-
ments. And also our Saviour, when He manifested Himself to
the world at the Jordan, began from that point. For when He
had been baptised, the spirit led Him into the wilderness, and
then He fasted forty days and forty nights. And all those who
follow His steps, base the beginning of their struggle upon this
action. That weapon was polished by God, who should despise
it without being blameworthy? If the lawgiver has fasted, to
Verli, Afd. Letterk. 1922(Wensinokj. ti

62 A tREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS' ETC!.
I
which guardian of the law is it not necessary to do likewise?
Till then the human race had not known victory, and Satan
had never experienced defeat on the part ofour nature through
;
this weapon, however, he was vanquished for the first time
and the first vict — ory was won which set the crown on the head
of our nature. Thus it is that as soon as this weapon
appears in the hand of a man, immediately fear falls upon
the deliberations of Satan, that head of rebellion, and at once
his mind is struck by the recollection of that defeat in the
desert and that first defeat he had to suffer. His strength will
be broken when he sees the weapon which our commander
has placed in our hands. As soon as he sees this weapon worn
by any man, he knows that this one is prepared for the strife.
What weapon is stronger than this and which gives encoura-
!4i gement to the heart in the struggle with evil spirits as hunger
for Christ's sake does? To the degree in which a man's body
is fatigued and kept down at the time when the hosts of Satan
surround him, to the same degree his heart is supported by
confidence. And he that is constantly in this state, will at all
times be burning with zeal as it were with fire.
Constant fasting is a symptom of zeal and fervour in war.
Even that zealot Eliyah took upon him this tribulation when
he fought for the divine law. Forty days he restrained his
mouth from food, during the long walk through the desert.
Fasting reminds those who practise it of the spiritual com-
mandments; for it was a mediator in the ancient law and by
the grace of our Lord Jesus we have received it. But what
more shall I say concerning its merits which are known to
every one? He that despises fasting, will also be weak and
without vigour in the other good works, because he lacks the
weapon by means of which the godlike athletes have been
victorious. And he that from the beginning shows in himself
a sign of relaxation, gives his adversary a chance of victory
and enters battle in a state of deprivation. And it is certain
that he will leave it, without the victory, because he has berea-
ved himself of the force which divine zeal had stirred in him.
Thus he begins strife in a state of cold in stead of in a state
of heat. For his limbs are not clad with the flame of hunger,
namely of fasting during which the mind endures the strokes
of all hard and unexpected events motionless.
It is said concerning many of the holy martyrs that, when

A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. l6$
242 they were informed by a spiritual revelation or by one of their
friends, regarding the day on which they would receive the
crown, they did not taste anything the preceding night, nor
did they take any food. But from the eve till morn they would
stand in prayer, awake, praising God in songs and glorifications
and hymns and spiritual melodies, being joyful and exalting
and expecting that moment as people destined to enter a bridal
house. They expected, while in a state of fasting, to receive
the blow of the sword and to be crowned with the crown of
the confessorship.
And we too have to keep this state of preparation perpe-
tually, o my brethren, expecting invisible martyrdom and the
winning of the crown of holiness, [being on our guard] lest in
any of our limbs a sign of unbelief be given to our enemies.
Thus our outward senses and our inward impulses being clad
with all the weapons of God we shall receive this crown
,
deserving it and so we shall go in unto His glory with the
holy martyrs, striking our enemies with amazement. For without
labour nobody wins the crown, as the teacher, the great
Diodorus ] ) says. For it is well known that it would be most
unworthy that merchants may not bring home riches without
labour and dangerous storms, and that yet the righteous should
expect the remuneration of the crown, without injury and labour
for the sake of righteousness.
The disciple. Many are those who perform these labours,
243
yet do not perceive rest as to the affections, nor peace as to
the deliberations.
The teacher. The affections hidden in the soul, o my
brother, cannot be apeased by the works o( solitaries which
are performed with the body alone, nor do these hinder the
deliberations from being constantly stirred by the senses. These
labours guard man against being vanquished by desires and
against harm caused by the demons. But they do not give
peace and rest unto the soul too. Labours cause apathy and
mortify our limbs on the earth and give rest on the part of
deliberations, only if they are combined with solitude, when
also the outward senses rest from turbulance and have become
addicted during some time, to the service of wisdom. Until a
man refrains from meeting his fellow-man and until he checks
l) One of the London Mss. has: Basil

164 A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC.
his limbs — from mingling with many things, and concentrates
his self, he will not be acquainted with his affections. For
solitude, the — blessed Basilius, the shining torch of the whole
world, says is the beginning of the purification of the soul.
For when the outward senses have rest from outward turbulence,
then the mind will return from distraction unto its place and
the heart will be stirred to examine the inner impulses of the
soul and if it perseveres well it will reach in its course even
the purification of the soul.
The disciple. Is it not possible for the soul, if it be strong,
to be purified while having connections with the outward world?
The teacher. If a tree is watered every day, when will
244 its roots become dried up? A vessel whose contents increase
daily, when will it be empty? If purity be nothing else than to
forget the dealings belonging to non-freedom and to have peace
from their recollection, and if a man, either personally and
practically, or through others, renews in his soul by the medium
of the senses this recollection, viz. the knowledge of evil things,
when shall he be purified from them ? Or when shall he be
liberated from the strife with outward things, so that it will be
possible to see inward things and gain peace? When the heart
is defiled every day, when can it be purified from filth ?
Perhaps it cannot even dominate practice, not to speak of
purifying the root. For it stands in the centre of the camp
and every day its ears are struck by the rumour of battles,
how then can it venture to proclaim peace to itself? But if it
be far from these, then it will be able to grant peace to the
inward things gradually. Before the stream from above has
been shut off, the nether waters will not dry up.
But when a man has found solitude, the soul is able to
expel the affections and to test its own wisdom. Then the in-
ward man will be stirred unto spiritual service and day by da)1
he will perceive the hidden wisdom moving in his soul.
The disciple. What are the true marks and the undubi-
table signs that from a man's labour the hidden fruits are
beginning to show themselves in the soul?
The teacher. When he is deemed worthy of the gift of
245 tears, flowing abundantly and without compulsion. Tears are
to the mind the sure distinction between the bodily and the
spiritual state, between the state of apperception and that of
purity. As long as one has not yet received this gift, the

A TREATISE IN QUKSTIONS AND ANSWKRS KTC. I65
labour of his service is still in the outward man, and this to
such an extent that he does not even perceive anything of the
hidden service of the spiritual man. When he begins to leave
the bodiliness of this world and moves in that territory which
lies beyond this visible nature, then at once he will reach the
grace of tears. And from the first apartment of that hidden
behaviour these tears will begin and they will conduct him to
the complete love of God. When he has reached this point,
tears will be so copious that he drinks them with his food and
his drink, so constant and abundant are they. This is a true
token of the mind's leaving this world and its apperceiving
the spiritual world. And the more the mind approaches unto
this world, the more these tears will diminish. And when the
mind is wholly in the worldly things, it will also be completely
without tears, and this is the sign of its being enveloped by
the affections.
Some tears cause a burning heat, others render fat. All
tears which flow for grief and distress of heart caused by-
sins, make the body lean and burning with heat. And often
when these tears are shed, one will even feel that his marrow
is injured. Man will necessarily enter this order of tears first.
246 Then by them the gate leading to the second order will be
opened for him, an order which is by far superior, because it
contains the sign of the receiving of mercy. What is this?
Those tears which have their origin in insight, make the body
fat they flow spontaneously and compulsion has no share in
;
them. They also anoint the body and the aspect of the face
is changed. For a joyful heart renders the body beautiful.
These tears moisten the whole face when the mind lives in
solitude. The body acquires by them as it were some suste-
nance and joy is diffused over the face. Whosoever has expe-
rienced these two varying states, will understand.
The disciple. What is the resurrection of the soul, namely
if ye be risen with Christ? 1
)
The teacher. This is what is said by the apostle in
another place For God who commanded the light to shine
:
out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts "). Resurrection he
calls leaving the old state, which in the likeness ofHell hindered
him from seeing the light of the Gospel rise, so to say, which
1) Coloss. 3, i 2) 2 Cor. 4,6

I 66 A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC.
is the breath of life in the hope of the resurrection by which
the dawn of divine wisdom rises in the heart, so that he now
is a new man in whom is nothing of this world. As it has
been said : A new heart also will I give you ; and a new
spirit will I put within you1 ). Then in truth Christ is imprinted
on them, by the spirit of wisdom and revelation, in knowledge
concerning Him.
The disciple. What is, in short terms, the power of the
practice of solitude?
247 The teacher. It mortifies the outward senses and quickens
the inward impulses. Intercourse, however, works in the in-
verse way.
The disciple. What is the cause of the visions and reve-
lations granted unto some? To others however, who have
laboured more than the former, such things are not granted.
The teacher. The causes of revelations and visions are
many, not one. The first cause of revelations and visions is
God's will to give a token of His mercy ; in this case God
provided men with them in order to help them. Some take
place on account of divine providence. These are the common
cases. The rest take place in order to strengthen and to en-
courage the weak, and to console and instruct them.
[An instance of those revelations which take place by] pro-
vidence are the angels which were seen at the side of the
grave, and those which at the Assumption appeared unto the
Apostles who were both distressed and stupefied and in con-
fusion on account of the Lord's departure from them. And at
once two angels appeared who stood by them in white apparel,
and those which appeared in the prison and in any place where
[the apostles] fell into the hands of men. Unto single persons
and unto the other saints after them they appeared, and even
to this day. For these three classes of men such visitations
are usually provided for those who are simple and irre-
:
proachable above measure or for holy and perfect persons
; ,
or for those who on account of fervent zeal have fled from
248 the world abandoning it entirely in despair and retiring from
•,
any part inhabited by men, following God, naked, without hope
or help from anything visible, assailed by the fear of desolation
or surrounded by the peril of death from hunger or illness or
1) Ez. 36,26

; ,
A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. I67
any evil whatever and near to dejection. That such consola-
tions happen to some people, whereas others who are their
superiors in works remain without anything of that kind, is in
the first place founded on purity or non-purity of the heart,
A
I mean. second cause is certainly this, that as long as a
man receives consolation from his fellow-man or from any of
these visible things, such [heavenly] consolations do not happen
to him, safe only by providential decree and this bears a
common character.
But our discourse is for solitaries. A witness to this is one
of the saints who has announced that there came a voice unto
him saying Enough of consolation from and intercourse with
:
men ! Another witness : ) to this is he who led a solitary life
in reclusion, and often tasted from consolations granted by-
grace, and divine care often became visible to him in manifest
apperception but when he came near the inhabited world and
;
sought these things as usual, he did not find them. He be-
sought God that the truth concerning this matter might become
249 known to him, saying : Perhaps, my Lord, grace has been
withdrawn from me on account of my episcopal rank? It was
said to him No. But then, there was the desert, there were
:
no men, but God provided for thee. No — w, there is the inha-
bited world and men provide for thee. So we say that it
is impossible for a man to share in visible as well as in spi-
ritual consolation.
The disciple. Are vision and revelation one, or are they
different in fact as they are different in names?
The teacher. There is a difference between vision and
revelation. The name of revelation covers the two, because it
denotes the revealing of a thing that hitherto was hidden and
now becomes manifest in any way. But not all that is revelation
is at the same time vision. But what is vision is also called
revelation, because it is a hidden thing which is revealed. But
not all that comes to be revealed and known, is vision.
Revelation is usually connected with what is intelligible and
tasted with the intellect. Vision, however, always happens in
similitudes-, as those things which were ministered unto the
ancients, be it in the depth of sleep, or in the state of waking
sometimes clearly, at other times dimly, while he to whom the
1) Sec Introduction

,
1 68 A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC.
vision was given often did not know whether he saw awake
or in sleep. Even after he had regained consciousness, he did
not know whether the thing had in reality happened to him,
or as in a dream. Sometimes a voice of help was heard;
250 sometimes a symbolical representation was seen ; sometimes
there was a clear apparition, face to face, and sight and speech,
questions and intercourse and those holy hosts appeared to
;
those who were worthy. It is clear that in the desert and the
wilderness and in lonely places and in places of retreat from
the world, such things happen where man decidedly needs
;
them, because he has no help from any side.
Revelation of those things which are apperceived intellec-
tually, is received through purity. And the latter only belongs
to the initiated and perfect.
The disciple. When any one has reached purity of heart,
what is the token thereof? And when shall he know himself
whether his heart has come to purity?
The teacher. When he sees all men in a good light,
without any one appearing to him unclean or defiled. Such a
man has really reached purity. If this were not true, how could
it be possible to fulfill the word of the Apostle : When a man
possesses all excellence, he reckons every one superior to him-
self in heart and truth 1
).
But when he has reached the point mentioned, he whose
eyes are pure, does not see evil.
The disciple. What is purity and where is its limit?
The teacher. I think that purity is oblivion of those kinds
of knowledge which do not belong to nature, those namely
which nature has found in the world. Its limit consists therein
that we are freed from that knowledge to such a degree that
we reach the original simplicity and integrity of nature in the
251 way of a child, apart from small exceptions only.
The disciple. It is possible for a man to reach this order?
The teacher. Ay. One of the Fathers was come so
far, that he repeatedly asked his pupil whether he had eaten
bread or not. And one of the saints who was then an old
ascetic, had become so pure and simple and had reached such
a perfection and serenity, that he was nearly as a babe
having forgotten all wordly things. And perhaps many will not
1) Cf. Thilippiaus 2,3

,
A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. I69
believe us what we say (for it is a real wonder) that even at
the oblation of the Eucharist he could not observe [the fast]
so as to receive the Eucharist he did not even know whether
;
he had observed [the fast] or not, till his disciples kept watch
on him in his cell and brought him to the sanctuary, as a little
boy. So very serene and pure was this blessed man. And being
thus in worldly things, in his soul he was perfect with God.
The disciple. Which meditation and occupation should a
man have in his reclusion and solitude, lest his intellect should
be found to be occupied with accidental deliberations?
The teacher. Thou askest what shall be the meditation
of him that is dead to the world in his cell. Should a man
who is zealous and whose soul is awake, need to ask what
his work should be in his solitude? What is the meditation of
the solitary in his cell but weeping? Should he be able to turn
his gaze from weeping towards a different deliberation? Which
252 meditation would be more profitable? For his dwellingplace,
lonely like the grave and deprived of all worldly pleasures,
teaches him that his service consists in weeping. And even his
name turns him into this direction ; for he is called abila
which means: bitter in heart. All the righteous have departed
this world with weeping. If the saints would weep and their
mouths at all times were filled with their tears and they thus
departed this world, who should not weep then ? The consolation
of the recluse is born from weeping. If those who were vic-
torious have shed tears in this world, how then should he that
is covered with wounds dare to abstain from weeping? If be-
fore the housefather his beloved is laid dead, should he need
instruction concerning the thought which should move him to
tears? Thy soul which is dead in sins is laid before thee, thy
soul which is of greater value to thee than the whole world.
If we come to solitude, we can also get accustomed to weeping.
Therefore we should steadily beseech our Lord to give us this.
If w re receive this gift, excellent above any other, through
weeping we shall reach purity. And when we have reached it,
it will not be taken from us again, to the day on which we
shall depart the world.
Blessed therefore are the pure in heart who at all times
enjoy this delight of tears and through it constantly see our
Lord. While tears are in their eyes, they are deemed worthy
253 of seeing His revelation at the height of prayer ; for they even

IJO A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC.
know of no prayer without tears. And this is what has been
said by our Lord Blessed are they that mourn for they shall
: :
be comforted *). For by mournfulness a man reaches purity of
soul. When therefore our Saviour says : Blessed are they that
mourn for they shall be comforted, He does not explain what
:
comfort is. When the solitary is deemed worthy on account of
his mournfulness to pass beyond this place of affections and
to reach the plain of purity of soul, where he will — find a con-
solation that will not leave those who have found it then it is
clear that the consolation which at the completion ofmournfulness
is received through purity, is promised by our Lord to the
mournful. For if any one weeps constantly, the affections will
not approach his heart; for weeping lies beyond affectibility.
If tears are able to efface from the mind of him that mourns
and weeps for but a short time, the recollection of the affec-
tions, what shall we say about him who has imposed upon
himself a definite service during day and night? Who knows
the profits of weeping, save those who have given themselves
to it? All the saints desire this [means of introduction; and
J
by weeping, a gate is opened before them through which they
enter that place of consolation, in which the footsteps of God's
love are impressed by revelations.
The disciple. But because man is not able to adhere to
this "practice, on account of the body's weak nature , it is
necessary for him to have some other thing serving to capti-
254 vate his mind, lest the affections should assail him through the
idleness of the intellect.
The teacher. The affections are not able to assail the
soul and to trouble the solitary whose heart is cut off from
the world by dwelling lonely in the complete solitude of the
desert, separated fr — om all the sounds and voices of the com-
motion of mankind unless he neglect his duties, especially
that of being occupied with the scriptures and the profitable
deliberations with which he is occupied, by the excellent under-
standing of which paltry thoughts are driven away from him
and his mind is not able to free itself from them, but [in this
state] he gazes upon the whole world, because of the great
delight of that occupation by which the intellect is completely
satisfied in that extreme loneliness of the desert. So he looses
1) Matthew 5,4

1
A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. I7
consciousness of himself and forgets his nature and he becomes
as one who is mad without any recollection of the world •,
especially when he thinks of God's greatness, the glory of His
nature and His wondrous works and when he recollects how
high his own despicable being has been elevated. To think
about Him and to dare foster such thoughts for the sake of
delight and to get drunk at all times by ecstatic impulses as
in the life after resurrection, are things greatly promoted by
solitude, because the intellect has the opportunity of being with
itself, in the peace that has its origin in solitude. At the same
time it will adapt its recollections to the aim of its course,
and it will direct itself towards the glory of the world to be,
the hope preserved for the righteous, life in spiritual emotion
255 wholly originating in God. This is the new way of life, without
recollection and without emotion concerning anything in this
world. And when he is satisfied with these things his contem-
plation turns from them towards the things of this world in
which he is still abiding, saying with amazement : O the depth
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge and unsear-
chable mind of God How unsearchable are His judgments
!
and His ways past finding out T ). Since He has prepared a
different world which is so amazing, into which He shall intro-
duce all rational beings and keep them without variance in life
without end. What then is the reason why He has made this
world first, which He has made large and has provided with
a great many species, and has made a place of a multitude
of affections? And He has set us first in this world and im-
planted in our nature a strong love of its own life; then He
expels us from it, gradually, by death and prescribes to us a
long interval in a state without sensual apperception, like stones
and wood, a state during which He destroys our image and
pours out our mettle and mixes it up with the earth. And He
permits our building to be demolished and ruined, till it has
lost all likeness with [its previous] composition. Then, at the
time appointed by His wisdom, working according to His free
will, He resurrects us in a different likeness which He knows
and introduces us into that new order; and not only us, but
also the holy angels, who do not need the use of this world
256 on account of their amazing nature. For all of them are nearly
1) Romans 11,33

;
172 A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC.
perfect, awaiting the resurrection and the elevation of our
fallen state, when the human race shall rise from the dust,
and its fallen state be quickened unto new life. For on account
of us they are hindered from entering', till once the gate of
that new world will be opened, which they expect. For even
the class o{ the angels sighs with us in that it sees us loaded
with the weight of the body while it hopes and expects the
revelation of the children of God, so that it itself may be freed
from slavery that perishes, in the freedom of the glory of the
children of God 1
).
F'irst he will free this whole [world] from its state so that
it is reduced to nothing, analogous to the first state of the
body. Then he will elevate himself intellectually beyond the
beginnings of the creation of the world, when there was no
creation nor anything, no heaven, no earth, no angels, nor any
of the created things. Then of a sudden he will bring all things
into existence, his will being sufficient to effect that all is be-
fore him in a state of perfection. Then he will descend in his
mind and visit all God's creatures. And in his high and wond-
rous works the wisdom of his creating power will show itself.
His power subdues all minds, the amazing and powerful strength
of his creating force brings into existence out of nothing a
creation with innumerable different kinds.
Then he will think of how He again will destroy this, so
that perishes the wondrous order, the ornament of kinds, the
257 prescribed course of the creatures, the times and occasions, the
harmony of night and day, the useful seasons of the year, the
embellished earth, the different kinds sprouting from it ; the
fine buildings of the cities and the beautiful palaces in them
the continual course of mankind, nature submitted and tormented
from man's entering it until he leaves it.
And how suddenly this wonderful order will be destroyed
and how a new world will begin in which no recollection what-
ever of the first creation will occur to any man's mind, in
which there will be a different mode of life, different delibera-
tions and different thoughts. Then human nature will no longer
recollect this world nor the former way of life in it. For the
cTaze of their mind will be captivated by the sight of that
[new] order, and it will not be able to turn in its memory
1) Cf. Rom. 8,21. On the following passage cf. the Introduction.

A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. I /3
towards the races of flesh and blood for as soon as this world
;
is destroyed, the new one will begin 1
O ).
mother that suddenly has been forgotten by the sons
—
which she has borne and educated and instructed and in
the twinkling of an eye they are gathered unto another bosom,
and have become real sons of the barren one that which has
never borne. Rejoice, o barren, thou that didst not bear, at
the sons which the earth has borne to thee. And the mind
thinks in amazement, of how a new world will take the place
of this, and of when its beginning will be and of how long
;
these bodies will lie in that state, body and dust mingled to-
gether; and what like that mode of life will be; and in what
likeness this nature will rise and in what way it will come to
the second creation.
By such thoughts rest will spread over the mind. And the
25s apperception of its bodily state will vanish and it will remain
;
a long time in silence, wondering at the incomprehensible deeds
of God. At that moment the solitary will kneel down and
render thanks with many tears to God who is wise in His
works, and whose deeds are incomprehensible, as are also the
secrets of His exalted mind, concerning what He has done
and what He will do. What heart of stone would not become
unconscious under such impulses, struck with silence and stupor,
and turned away from the emotions of senses and impulses
?
Blessed is he who has been deemed worthy of these things.
Blessed is he who has thought of this, day and night. Blessed
is he who has been occupied with these things during his
whole life. To every man this thought is useful, but especially
to him that lives in solitude. And it is becoming that these
recollections should always be with him. These indications a
man should take to mind and, having finished prayer, he should
think of them and meditate upon them.
When he is occupied with these thoughts, there will be no
room for foreign recollections in his spirit, which could hinder
him from the constant recollection of God. And if at first he
does not perceive the profitable influence of these things, on
account of his being distracted, he should not be dejected.
When the husbandman casts seed on the earth, it is not pos-
1) The two sentences which follow could be an interpolation; the sentence "And the
mind thinks" etc. is the direct continuation of the present one.

i 74 A treatise in questions and answers etc.
sible that he should see the oars at the same time. Dejection
and despondency are connected with sowing. It is sweet to
the peasant to eat of his bread ; but his sweat is still sweater.
259 This thought, in solitude, will pour endless delight into the
heart and will quickly draw the mind towards unspeakable
ecstasy. Blessed is he to whom this fountain has been opened
and who drinks from it at all hours of the clay and the night.
The disciple. What is the acme of all the labours of
asceticism, which a man, when he has reached recognises
it,
as the summit of his course?
The teacher. When he is deemed worthy of constant
prayer. When he has reached this, he has touched the end
of all virtues and forthwith he has a spiritual dwelling-place.
If a man has not received in truth the gift of the Comforter,
it is not possible for him to accomplish constant prayer in
quiet. When the spirit takes its dwelling-place in a man he
does not cease to pray, because the spirit will constantly pray
in him x ). Then, neither when he sleeps, nor when he is awake,
will prayer be cut off from his soul but when he eats and
;
when he drinks, when he lies down or when he does any
work, even when he is immersed in sleep, the perfumes of
prayer will breathe in his soul spontaneously. And henceforth
he will not possess prayer at limited times, but always and
;
when he has outward rest, even then prayer is ministered
unto him secretly. For the silence of the serene is prayer, says
a man clad with Christ. For their deliberations are divine im-
pulses. The motions of the pure mind are quiet voices with
which they secretly chant psalms to the Invisible One.
260 The disciple. What is spiritual prayer, and how are we
made worthy of it?
The teacher. It is the psychic impulses which partake
of the influence of the Holy Spirit, on account of veracious
purity. One man in ten thousand is found worthy of this. It
is a symbol of the future way of existence, for nature is ele-
vated and exempt from all the impulses from the recollection
of things in this world. It does not pray, but the soul per-
ceives the spiritual things of the world beyond (which is so-
mething- greater than the mind of man); the understanding of
—
these is kindled by spiritual force. It is inner sight, and
I) This is apparently the meaning of the sentence, which in theoriginalisnotquiteclear.

A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. 175
not the impulse and the beseeching of prayer. It has its starting
point in prayer. Because such men have reached the summit
of purity and beca — use at all times their inner — emotions are
stirring in prayer as I have said before the Spirit,
whenever it looks at them, will find them in prayer; and from
there it will conduct them by contemplation, which is inter-
preted spiritual sight. They do not want prolonged prayer nor
the defined order of frequent service.
Tor the recollection of God alone will be sufficient for them,
and at once they will be governed by love, as if captives.
But because of this state they are not absolutely negligent,
but attribute honour to prayer by standing on their feet at
fixed times; but they do not practise continual prayer.
Tor we see that the holy Antonius, when standing on his feet
261 in the prayer of the ninth hour, perceived that his mind was
taken up. And another saint found himself in ecstasy for four
days, while he stood in prayer with outspread hands. And, on
examination, it will be seen in the stories of many others that
they were found in the well known attitude of prayer, when
granted this gift. A man is deemed worthy of this, when he
puts off outward and inward sin, by observing the command-
ments of our Lord, which are anterior to this state. If one
will practise these in his own degree, it is inevitably necessary
for him to forsake all human things. This means: he shall put
off the body and be outside it, so to speak ; not its nature,
but the use of it. There is nobody who has practised these
things in the sense of the lawgiver, and with whom sin has
persevered to dwell.
Therefore our Lord has promised in the Gospel, that He
shall make His dwelling-place the man who observes these
things.
The disciple. And what is the perfection of all spiritual
fruits?
The teacher. This is when man is deemed worthy of
the complete love of God.
The disciple. And how can he that has reached this
point, acquire certainty?
The teacher. Every time when the thought of God is
stirred in his spirit, the heart will become hot with love at
once, the eyes will shed multitudinous tears; for love is accus-
tomed to shed tears at the recollection of the beloved. He

t76 A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC.
that is iii this state will never be found destitute of tears, be*
262 cause he is never without abundant recollection of God, so
that even during sleep he speaks with Him. Love is accus-
tomed to practise these things and this is the accomplishment
of man in this life.
The disciple. He that after many labours and fatigues
and victories fought and won, is assailed by the thought of
haughtiness that is based upon the beauty of his — excellence,
when he recalls the many labours he has borne how can
he restrain his thoughts and regain watchfulness so as not to
give way?
The teacher. When he knows that he falls from God as
a withered leaf falls from the tree, then he will also know
his own strength and recognise whether he has acquired these.
virtues by his strength and whether he could have withstood
all the struggles face-to-face if Czod had withdrawn from him
His help and had left him alone in his strife with Satan without
being accompanied by that force that usually accompanies the
victorious combatants in their struocdes. yor here their strength,
or better their weakness, comes to light. So that it is God's
care for man which at all times guards and strengthens him
and through which he overcomes all classes of men, be it in
the struggle of chastity , or in the sufferings of martyrdom or
in the other hardships while he suffers for the sake of divine
things.
This is well known and no doubt concerning it is possible.
For how else could nature vanquish this mighty force of never
resting allurements which have their seat in man's members
263 and torment him and yet he does withstand them? How is it
that others which love and long after the same purity, arc not
able to reach it, though they strive after it, nay daily they
are cast back, tormented and sad and weeping over them-
selves, whereas thou bearest easily the difficulties of nature,
which are so hard, and yet thou art not oppressed by them?
Or how were it possible that another should endure in his
sensitive flesh the cutting iron and the combs in all his members
without being vanquished by suffering under all kinds oftortures,
whereas else he could not endure a little thorn inserted under
his nail? But these totally diverse tortures he bears without
suffering in the natural way. How should this be possible unless
some force, apart from that of nature, were sent to him and

A TREATtSE IN QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ETC. XJ1
from another direction and unless this force restrained and
mitigated the force of the tortures?
There is nothing that withholds us from mentioning here a
story that is really amazing to one who hears it. Because we
have pointed to God's care for man which makes him victo-
rious in all battles for the sake of excellence, it would not be
becoming to omit this story. Socrates, in his work on the
history of the church, when mentioning the Roman emperors,
relates in a succinct way the evil which the members of the
church had to suffer under Julianus then passing on to par-
;
264 ticulars he tells a story of that which happened in the city of
Antioch.
A
certain adolescent, Theodore by name, was brought by
the heathens before Sallustius, to whom thejurisdiction in these
matters had been entrusted. He gave him up to suffering and
torture, commanding that his whole body should be combed.
Then he set him free from torture, thinking: that he was dead.
But God was the saviour of that blessed man, who lived for
a long time after his testimony. For Rufinus, who has written
about ecclesiastical things in Greek, says that a long time after
he had conversation with this blessed Theodore. He asked him
whether he had felt the pain keenly when being tortured. The
latter answered that he had been conscious of pain to a very
trifling extent only. For a young man had been standing near
him, wiping off the sweat of the struggle and strengthening
his soul and making the time of the struggle of the tortures
a delight to him. O, for God's compassion, how near is His
bounty to those who begin the warfare for His sake in order
to bear sufferings for Him gladly. Do not injure God's bounty
to thee, o man.
If it is manifest, that thou art not the victor but that thou
art as an instrument and that the Lord wins the victory for
thee whereas thou obtainest the name of victor as a present,
what then hinders thee from beseeching at all times the same
power, that thou mayest always obtain the same victory as a
z65 witness? Hast thou not heard, o man, from of old and from
the beginnings of time, how many champions have fallen from
the height of their victories because they have injured grace?
On the same subject. The gifts of God unto the human
race being many and various, there is also a difference in their
smallness or greatness in relation to those who receive them.
Vcrh. AfJ. Lcltcrk. 1922 (Wonsinck).

17$ a Treatise In questions and answers ETC.
Though all of them are wonderful and glorious, one is more
than the other in glory and honour. One degree is higher than
the previous one, according to the word of scripture.
And further, that a man be elected to practise good works
and a steady behaviour, this is one of the principal gifts of
Christ. But many forget this grace, namely those whom God
has distinguished above others so that they belong to the
receivers of His gifts, even to the degree that they are elected
to the service of the Lord then, in contrast to the gratitude
•,
which was always on their lips, they turn aside to presumption
and become haughty in mind. And though they have been
made worthy to serve God with pure behaviour and spiritual
labours, yet they do not deem themselves receivers of grace
but as those who deserve this through God, forgetting that
they have been elected from the rest of mankind unto fami-
liarity with Him and knowledge of His mysteries. Nor do they
tremble in their whole soul when they think of how their
comrades, who fostered the same thoughts, were suddenly de-
266 prived of that strength with which they had been entrusted,
and of how in the twinkling of an eye they lost the great
honour they had possessed and declined quickly unto lasci-
viousness and turned towards the base behaviour of the irra-
tional animals. And because they know not the strength of
their soul, nor perpetually recollect Him that made them worthy
of the great boon of serving Him and of abiding in the honour
of His kingdom and that made them comrades of the spiritual
beings and brought them near unto the behaviour of the angels,
He rejects them from their service. Thus He shows to them
by the sudden variations of their behaviour, that it was not
by their own [strength] that they adhered to a steady behaviour
under all the assaults of nature and the demons and the other
impediments, but that this strength was a gift from Him.
What other men cannot even endure to listen to, on account
of its difficulty, this they have endured a long time without
being vanquished, because the strength that accompanied them
was able to help them under all circumstances and to guard
them at all times. Accordingly, since they have forgotten this,
the word has been fulfilled in them. Namely as they have not
willed concerning themselves that they should know God, viz.
their Lord who has made the service of the spiritual beings
descend to earth, God has delivered them up to vain know-

A TREATISE IN QUESTIONS ANt> ANSWERS ETC. 179
ledge and so they have received in person the retribution which
their forgetfulness had deserved.
The disciple. Is it possible that a man should so to
speak daringly leave the dwellingplaces of men suddenly and
267 go naked into the uninhabited desert and the terrible wilderness
in beautiful zeal and that he should die there from hunger or
from the absence of shelter or the like?
The teacher. He that has prepared a dwellingplace for
the beasts before He created them and who provides their
wants, will not neglect those who fear them, especially when
they follow Him simply, without forethought. He whose will
accords with God in all things will never, for fear of bodily
evils and dangers, consent to adhere to a filthy behaviour and
to endure a life of humiliation because he fears troubles. But
he will count it an exquisite and delicious thing to become
estranged to the whole world in purity of behaviour, and to
lead a life of deprivation among hills and mountains and to
wander in the haunts of beasts and not to lead a life of filth,
in bodily comfort, delivering up his soul so that it be for ever
destitute of a pious and pure behaviour unto God, to whom
belongeth the glory and the honour and who preserves us in
His goodness and sanctifies us by His spirit to the honour of
His name, that we may praise Him worthily all the days of
our life, Amen.
For one of the saints says1): The body becomes a comrade
of sin for it is afraid of troubles, thinking it may receive an
;
injury and have to give up its life. For the spirit of God
oppresses the body so that it dies ; it is well known that it
cannot vanquish sin unless it die. Who desires that our Lord
should dwell in him, will oppress his body and minister unto
his Lord those spiritual fruits which the apostle describes and
;
he will guard his soul against the works of the flesh which
268 Paul describes. For the body that is mingled with sin takes
pleasure in the works of the flesh. And the spirit of God takes
pleasure in its own fruits. When the body is weak by fasting
and mortification, the soul is spiritually strong through prayer.
When the body is vehemently oppressed by solitude and penury
and its life is near its term, it will beseech thee: Leave me a
while to behave with moderation. Now I give directions because
1) Introduction p. 32

:;
So a -Treatise in questions and answers etc.
i
know by experience that evils are of this nature. And when
I
thou releasest the body somewhat from oppression, giving it
some comfort by sparing it so that it can take breath again,
then it will whisper to thee quietly again and again : Let us
leave even the wilderness. For its allurements are very strong
says] from now onward we shall be able to behave well,
fit :
even in the neighbourhood of the inhabited world. For we
have been put to the test in many things and we shall be able
to continue this [behaviour] even there. Put me to the test
and if I do not comply w — ith thy will, we can begin anew for
the desert lies before us. But do not believe [the body] even
if it beseeches and promises greatly, for it will not keep its
promises. When thou hast granted it some of its wishes, it
will drive thee on towards greater concessions from which thou
canst not retract thy steps. When thou art dejected on account
of thy being filled with troubles, say to thyself: Doest thou
desire this filth and this sordid life? And if the — body says to
thee : It is a great sin that thou killest thyself, say to it
I kill myself because I cannot live purely. I will die now and
not further see my soul's essential die away from God. It is
269 better for me to die now for the sake of purity than to live
a shameful life in the world1 ). This death 1 willingly choose on
account of my sins. I kill myself because I have sinned before
God and will not further rouse His anger. What to me is life
afar from God? I will bear these evils and through them I
will not be a stranger to heavenly hope. Why have I been
created in the world, if I simply enter and leave it? And what
should God profit by my life in the world, if I lived badly in
it? On the contrary, I would but rouse His anger.
XXXVI
ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN WARS
AGAINST THOSE WHO TREAD THE NARROW WAY
WHICH ABOVE THE WORLD
IS
Our enemy Satan has also other methods, when he cun-
ningly proposes to attack those who engage themselves in this
strife. His way of warfare varies according to their character
and in relation to their personal tendencies.
1) See p. 31, 97

ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN ETC. 151
As to those whom he sees to be of a weak will and of
feeble thought he combates them vehemently from the be-
ginning by submitting them to heavy and terrible temptations,
in order to make them taste the nature of his evil from the
very beginning of the way. In this way he intends to instill
into them a horror of the first battle so that this way shall
appear to them difficult to walk. And if the beginning is very
270 difficult, who could endure to the end, facing all the battles
which are ranged in the middle? Thus they will not again
venture to withstand him or to look for other help, on account
of their being totally occupied with the thought of his attacks.
And when he has pressed them a little vehemently they take
to flight. Or better: God lets him oppress them, without hel-
ping them in any way because they have engaged in the battle
of the Lord, with a cold heart and hesitatingly. Cursed is every-
one who performs the work of the Lord without diligence,
retaining his hand from bloodshed. But also His help is near
:
those who fear Him ] and He commands that we should not
) ;
meet the foe with a cold and fearful heart. Begin to destroy
him and to wage war with him and I will begin to put the
dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the nations that are
under the whole heaven 2
).
If thou doest not voluntarily die to the senses for the sake
of the love of God, thou wilt die intellectually away from God,
against thy will. That which belongs to thy lot thou shalt not
refuse to take upon thee willingly, though it is connected with
temporary suffering afterwards thou shalt enter the glory of
;
God. If thou perishest bodily in the strife of the Lord, the
Lord will even crown thee and to thy thriumphant limbs He
;
will attribute the honour of the martyrs.
So, as I have ,said above, if they have not girded them-
selves up from the beginning and strengthened themselves and
vowed themselves to death, then they will appear to be inferior
in all battles, especially because God overlooks their relaxa-
tion 3 ) in that they trie to accomplish the work of the Lord in
271 a frivolous and tentative way. And even Satan knows them
from the beginning, examining what their thoughts are pusil-
:
lanimous, loving themselves, even sparing their body. So he
persecutes them like a hurrycane, because he does not find in
1) Vs. 145, 19 2) Ucut. 2,25 3) Clx&lAoaX as the London Mss. have

;
152 ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN ETC.
them the intelligible power which he usually finds in the trium-
phant. As a man's will tends towards God, for whose sake he
loves labours, so God will send him His help and show him
Mis care. For it is not possible for Satan to approach unto
anyone or to bring forward his temptations, except by permis-
sion of the godhead ; or else that his will has become relaxed
and he has given himself to impure thoughts and to distraction
;
or because doubt has taken hold of him. Concerning such
persons Satan does not ask [permission] to try them as in the
case of those who are perfect and great as to the latter he
•,
knows that they are not given over into his hand. For he
knows that it is not possible that the power of God's care be
withdrawn from them. Fxcept because of one of the causes
mentioned.
This is one way in which the foe makes war. As to those
whose will he sees to be vigorous and who reckon death as
nothing and who have begun with keen zeal giving themselves
over to every temptation and to death, and who tramp — le upon
life and the world and the body with its temptations thees
272 he does not meet at the outset, nor does he usually show
himself to them. But he withdraws himself and gives way to
them. He neither encounters them with his principal force nor
does he enter into battle with them. For he knows that the
beginning of battles is usually hot and the antagonist is zealous
and zealous champions are seldom vanquished.
This method he follows, not because he is afraid of them,
but of that divine power which sets them ablaze through the
forces working in them till they begin to emit it through their
own will in full confidence. But he leaves them for some time
till their zeal is abating and their attention is withdrawn from
the exercise of the weapon for which they had trained them-
selves and with which they had armed their mind, viz. different
divine words and profitable and strengthening recollections
and thus awaits the time of negligence. And when the first
thoughts have abated somewhat, how often will they find within
themselves occasions of defeat on account of allurements that
have their origin in the mind. They dig a ditch in themselves
through the distraction of thoughts that arise in their mind
through tediousness, through which a chill overpowers them.
It is not spontaneous when Satan acts thus, delaying the
time of battle for neither when he spares them nor when he
;

ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN ETC. I 83
withdraws himself from them, does he account them nothing.
But I think that a certain power surrounds those who are
blazing with fervour unto God and who have begun in a
youthful way, without forethought, confiding in Him on account
273 of their faith, without knowing however against whomthey have
to fight. Therefore he conceals his evil nature from them, ap-
proaching not near. For his nature is checked by the guardian
which he sees with them continually. Now if they do not cast
away the causes of profit beseeching, labours and humbleness,
:
the helper will never withdraw Himself from them. The love
of comfort is a cause of [God's] withdrawal. But if they ad-
here to these [works] sedulously, they will never be destitute
of help and the foe will not be allowed to approach them.
And if [God] witdraws himself from time to time, this is for
the sake of training. For while the holy force governs and
accompanies them, they do not fear seducers; the mind is full
of courage and therefore it despises them. But He trains them
as a man who teaches swimming to a little boy ; as soon
as he begins to sink, the teacher lifts him up, for the boy
swims upon the hands of his teacher. And when the courage
of the boy begins to diminish, from fear that he will be drowned,
the man who supports him with his hands, cries : be not afraid,
I support thee. Or, as a mother who teaches her little child to
walk, places him at a distance from her and calls him; but
when the boy will go to his mother on those little tottering
feet of his, they tremble on account of their weakness. 1 hen
when the boy is about to fall, the mother will run and take him
274 in her arms. So God's grace will bear up and train the children
of man, namely those who trust themselves clearly and simply
to the hands of Him that created them and who with their
whole heart turn from the world and follow Him.
And thou, O man, who hast begun to follow God, recollect
perpetually during thy whole struggle the beginning and that
first zeal at the outset' of the way and the fervent thoughts
with which thou didst leave thy former life and range thyself
in the order of battle. And examine thyself every day [in order
to state] whether the fervour of thy soul has abated in compa-
rison with the zeal with which thou wert blazing. Or whether
thou lackest any weapon with which thou wert girded at the
beginning of thy struggle. And elevate constantly thy voice in
the camp and encourage those of the right hand with familiar

184 ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN ETC.
thoughts. And show the opposite party that thou art awake.
And if thou meetest impetuosity in the beginning-, because the
temptator will frighten thee, do not then relax. Perhaps this
will be profitable to thee.
It is not without reason that thy saviour permits anything
unto thee but only when He has foreseen it and ordered it
to thy profit. Show thou no relaxation from the beginning •
for if thou shouldst show relaxation here, thou wouldst not be
able to withstand what follows hunger, sickness, fearful sights
:
and so on. Do not turn into its opposite the intention of Him
that commands thee to fight, which serves to thy profit, lest
275 thy foe find thee as he hopes to find thee. But cry unto God
unceasingly and weep before His grace and weary thyself out
with beseeching, till He sends thee a helper. And if thou once
seest the saviour who is with thee, thou wilt no more be van-
quished by thy foe who is standing before thee.
Thus far these two kinds of strife.
Another way in which Satan makes war against
those who are girded.
When after all this Satan is still opposed by a man without
being able to overpower him in battle, or rather his helper,
for whose sake man resists him, and who helps and streng-
thens him to such an extent that he who is compact f—lesh and
body vanquishes him that is spiritual and unbodily when
Satan sees all the help which that man receives from God so
that his outward senses are not vanquished by sights and
sounds nor his thoughts weakened by excitations and allure-
ments, nay he even despises the blows they give him, then
he seeks for a means to separate that man from the angel that
helps him, or rather he purposes to blind the mind of him
that is helped so that he is left without support.
So he stirs that man's thoughts of presumption namely those
of [imaginary! strength, so that he thinks his mind the cause
of all this vigour and of the glorious wealth which he possesses
in his soul. His preservation from all these obstacles, sad, un-
276 speakable, and bloodthirsty, he sometimes ascribes to accident,
sometimes to their being weak. I do not mention other things
the bare recollection of which makes the soul shiver on account
of their blasphemous nature.
It also happens that he advances his betrayal insidiously
under the appearance of divine revelations. During sleep he

ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN ETC. 185
imparts information and in the state of waking he assumes the
likeness of an angel of light. And all this [is of such a nature]
that, should a man surrender to it even to a small extent, he
will become its victim. But if a man be wise and keep his
thoughts under control, or rather if God helps him and he
fixes the gaze of his heart on heaven in order to turn away
from incantators, then the foe plans another kind of war.
This is the only one left to him now ; and because it has some
affinity to nature he expects the more that man will be en-
tangled in it. What is it? He contrives in all manner of ways
to set man in contact with those things through which he
usually becomes guilty on account of his nature. The mind of
the warrior namely becomes blinded by sight of and contact
with [worldly] things, and it is easily vanquished in battle when
it is near them, especially when they are ranged before his
eyes. The clever one knows this cunning thoroughly on account
of his experience with many valiant champions who were van-
277 quished through it. Therefore he prepares this means cunningly.
And when it is not of a nature to be practised because of the
[warrior's] utter solitude and his dwelling far from things that
cause [sin], then he contrives to bring it near him through
phantasy. So he shows him fallacious images in the habit of
reality, in order that by these visions he be rendered desirous
and incited to conceive impure thoughts and become guilty
and to alienate Him that helps him. For Satan knows that the
solitary's victory and defeat, his treasure and his help and all
that belongs to him, depends upon deliberation, and that, if
deliberation be moved from its place, one short moment is
able to throw him down from the nest of life on to the earth,
if his will be pointed in this direction for even a moment only.
Thus it has happened to many of the saints that he showed
them the image of a beautiful woman.
Those who dwelt at a distance of one or two or even ten
parasangs from the inhabited world he did indeed contrive to
bring in contact with a woman. But to those, to whom he
could not do this on account of their distant dwellingplace
being too far oft", he showed the images of womanly beauty
by appearing to them, now in splendid dress and finery and in
a seducing aspect, now even in the form of a naked woman.
Some of the solitaries he overpowered by these means and
the like, some by real seduction, some by things of the ima-

I 86 ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN ETC.
gination which brought about their fall l ) through the relaxation
of their deliberations; so they fell down into the abyss of des-
pondency and turned unto the world, cutting themselves off
from heavenly hope.
Others however who were steadfast and illuminated by grace,
2/S have vanquished him and his fantastic representations and
trampled upon bodily pleasures and they have been found to
;
be elected by the love of God.
Often also he represents to them images of gold and precious
things as treasures that were hidden somewhere. It even happens
that he shows them these things in reality, expecting that by
one of these various [artifices] it will be possible to impede
some one of the solitaries so as to bar his course through his
being" entangled m one of the snares of his nets. Lead me
not, o Lord, into these temptations for even the strong and
;
the elect scarcely pass this gate victorious.
The seducer is allowed to make war upon the saints in all
these ways of temptation, in order that the love of God which
is in them may be proved under these circumstances; namely,
whether they are friends of God and whether they adhere to
His love because [worldly] things are at a distance, far off and
absent or whether they love God really, so as to make war
;
on and to despise these things even when present, without
being vanquished and without giving up their love of God
through the allurements of those temptations. This does not
happen that they may be known to God through these [temp-
tations], but to the Devil, who is very desirous of recognizing
them, if possible. As he also said concerning Job, asking God
about him : Doth Job fear God for nought 2 )? If then a little
negligence creeps in, the temptator approaches with authority
in accordance with the power he has over them. Then the
unjust appears in the desire which these things excite in him.
279 And through these things those are proved who are strong in
their love of Him, those who despise all these things, which
in their eyes are counted as nothing in comparison with the
love of God. In this they are humble, ascribing merits only to
Him who strengthens all and who is the cause of their victory
and into His hands they entrust the battle. For Thou art the
1) litt. derision
2) Job 1,9

ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN ETC 187
powerful, and the battle is Thine. Fight, o Lord, and be vic-
torious on our behalf.
Then they are tested by these things as gold in the furnace.
But those who are untrustworthy are recognized there through
those trials, and thrown out as refuse. They give way to their
foe and have to leave the battle, defeated through the relaxa-
tion of their mind, or perhaps through their haughtiness which
has made them unworthy of that strong power which is always
ready to help the saints.
For never to be defeated is the power of Him that helps
us, the omnipotent, the almighty, the victorious at all times
whenever Pie descends into the body of mortals to fight for
them. But it is manifest that those who are defeated, are
defeated without Him. They are those whose will is stripped
of Him because of their injustrice, who are not worthy of that
power which is the support of the victorious. They also per-
ceive at the time of battle that they lack the usual strength,
which they found in themselves in all hot and difficult battles.
How do they perceive this? They see in themselves that their
defeat gives them comfort and that the hardships of strife are
280 difficult for them to bear, hardships under which at all times
they were wonted to win a clear victory. And the emotions of
zeal which at such times used to stir na — ture vigorously and
which were strengthened by a fiery heat they do not find
them in themselves.
Now those who are shaken from their foundation are terri-
fied not only by these and the like struggles, but even by the
sound of the leaves of the trees L and give way and renounce
),
and turn their back under light trouble, for hunger or slight
illness. The true and elect, however, do not even satisfy their
hunger with herbs and vegetables. But, feeding upon drugs
and dry stubble, even then they are not to be persuaded to
open their mouth for food, before the fixed time. Lying on
the earth, with an emaciated body and eyes blinded 2 on
)
account of bodily weakness their soul near their mouth 3
, )
through tribulation, even then they do not give way so as
to be vanquished and give up their firm will. I;or it is more
delightful for them to be troubled for the sake of love, with
1) Cf. Lev. 26,36
2) Isaac himself is said to have become blinded
3) i.e. on the point of leaviDg the body

;
I 88 ON THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH SATAN ETC.
labours for excellency, than to possess temporal life and all its
comforts. So, when adversities approach them, they rejoice;
for they know that these will lead them to perfection. And
not only have they no doubt of the love of Christ in spite of
the bodily tortures they have to suffer, but it would be delightful
281 even to bear for His sake loss of life even then they would
;
not separate themselves from Him.
XXXVll
ON THE THINGS THE EXACT USE OF WHICH HAVE
I
LEARNT BY THE KNOWLEDGE OF DISCERNMENT
Having been tested many times by things of the right and
by things of the left, and examined myself in these two states
many times, and received innumerable blows from the opposi-
tion, and been deemed worthy of important, hidden support,
and having continued the examination of myself during a range
of years, I have learnt by experience that the principles of all
good things and the regaining of the soul from the captivity
of the enemies, and the way towards life and light, consist in
two things abiding in one and the same place, and constant
:
fasting. This means that a man, being wise, shall lay down
:
a fair law for his belly, by untroubled, constant sitting [alone].
Proceeding from here he will reach the subduing of the senses;
further watchfulness of mind further tranquillizing of brutish
: ; :
passions stirring in the body. Further: quiet thoughts. Further:
enlightened impulses of the spirit. Further application to ex-
:
cellent works. Further high and subtle insights. Further im-
: :
measurable tears at all times. Further watchful chastity, without
:
any connection with the experience of the image in the spirit.
282 Further : a quick and far gaze. Further : a deep intelligence,
penetrating and attaining to the hidden things in all depths,
the power of words and the hidden motions in the soul and
;
the distinctions of spirits and holy powers of true sight and
;
deceitful images. Further fear of the [many] ways and tracks
—:
in the sea of the spirit fear that cuts off negligence ; and
blazing zeal which tramples upon all dangers and sets its foot
upon all things feared ; and fervour despising all desires and
effacing from the mind the recollection of all transitory things

ON THE TH1NOS THE EXACT USE OE WHICH ETC. 189
and many other things. In brief: the liberation of true man
and the renewal of the soul and the resurrection with Christ
in the kingdom, away from here.
He
that neglects these two1 should know that he not only
),
bereaves himself of these, but that he shakes the foundation
of all virtues by despising these two. And as the beginning
of all other virtues in the soul is formed by these principles
of all divine service, which are the gate and the way unto
Christ, for him that takes hold of them and sticks to them,
so the deviation and the departure from them towards those
which are their opposite, I mean distraction of the body and
a lawless belly, constitute in the soul a place for the beginning
of all things contrary to those mentioned above. And also this
attitude takes its source in one action, viz. in the fact that
the submissive senses are first freed from the bonds of lonely
dwelling. And what are the consequences? Unexpected, impure
283 contact; threatening danger of falling agitation and heavy
billows stirred by sensible sight; almighty flames kindled in
the body; small spiritual shortcomings; uncontrollable delibe-
rations, prone to falling; lack of love of service; gradual for-
getting of the distinctions of solitude complete negligence of
;
the canons of behaviour; renewal of former things which had
become effaced, and instruction concerning other new things,
unknown before and caused by audition on various and per-
petually recurring occasions and by a multitude ofunintentional
cases of sight, presenting themselves on account of perpetual
travelling from country to country and from place to place.
All this has the effect that those affections which by God's
grace were already slumbering in the soul on account of the
oblivion into which obliterated recollections had passed, begin
to be stirred into motion anew, forcing the soul to work. And
there are yet other [injuries] which I will not mention all of
them; taking their origin in that first one, they are let loose
against the miserable one, and he has to bear them.
And what is the second fault? This, that he begins to re-
semble the swines in his deeds. What is it that the swines do ?
They do not check their belly, filling it at all times without
having an hour fixed for food, as rational beings have.
And what further? From this comes heavy sleep, great
1) solitude and fasting

196 on the Things the ex^act use of which etc.
284 bodily heaviness and a slackening of the shoulders the com-
•,
pulsion to desist from services, aversion to the inclinations [
)
connected with them contempt of the usual prostrations, dark-
;
ness and coldness of spirit ; a dull mind that does not distin-
guish, confusedness and great darkness of deliberations thick
;
clouds and obscurity spread over the whole soul great dejec-
;
tion concerning every godly work, also concerning recitation
[of the scriptures], originating therein that the sweetness of the
sense of the words is not tasted frequent neglect of necessary
;
things an uncontrolled mind, made blunt by wandering through
;
the whole world, many humours gathered in the limbs; impure
phantasies during the whole night, consisting in sordid repre-
sentations and unclean voluptuous images, which cling to the
soul and act in it according to their impure pleasure -, and a
cover and a body wholly defiled by the large stream of shame-
ful things flowing from [the body] as from a fountain. And this
does not happen at night only, but also by day the body sends
forth [this stream constantly], defiling the mind thereby.
And on account of these things, [the solitary] disavows his
chastity. Sweet allurements working in the whole body with
unbearable and incessant heat ; exciting deliberations full of
beautiful faces representing them before him lasciviously and
perpetually and thereby seducing him a mind delivering itself
•,
unhesitatingly to intercourse with them, joining itself with them
in longing and meditation, because its distinctive faculty has
285 been blinded ; all this is what has been said by one of the
great philosophers he that provides his body with many things,
:
exposes his soul to penury. And though he recollects his soul
now and then, trying to compel himself, yet it is impossible
for him to keep his soul under control because of the hot
emotions in the body which by the power of their allurements,
forcibly captivate the soul, according to their pleasure. As the
clever and acute Mar Diodorus of Tarsus says to support the
:
body in softness and luxury, quickly imparts to the soul a
sensation of suffering, so that death becomes to it something
deplorable and God's judgment is thought of with fear. The
soul, however, that constantly thinks of becoming things, is
quiet in its being ; it has small solicitude, as it feels no grief.
Care for excellence is the driver ofthe affections, the guardian
1) cc*.«V\*

On The things The e^act use of which etc. 191
of excellence, a secure education, joy without solicitude, a good
life and a safe port. Bodily luxury strengthens the affections
and makes them dominant upon the soul, nay they even totally
eradicate it. And apart from all this, it inflames the belly on
account of wantonness and lack of rules as to hours. Yet [the
solitary] does not wish that gradually the passion of hunger
should gain power over his soul which in a compulsory way
could be brought by it under the dominion of the affections.
These are the fruits that come forth from the shameful
[passions] of the belly; and these are the fruits produced by
286 the lack of power to cling to one spot in peace. As now our
foe, who follows us constantly, knows that on these two occa-
sions nature is usually capable of being troubled and affected
with passion to a higher degree and also the mind easier to
be perflexed through sensible vision and the comfort of the
belly, therefore he contrives to surpass nature, and at these
times casts into the mind different haughty deliberations in
order to strengthen the power of passion over nature, if pos-
sible, by a more intense flame, and so ruin a man utterly.
Just as our foe knows these times, it is, therefore, necessary
for us to know them also as well as our own weakness and
the [want of] strength of our nature which is not able to with-
stand the vehement emotions of those times nor the delibera-
tions subtle as the dust of the earth which are before our eyes
so that we cannot see ourselves nor remain upright before fate.
By such experiences on many occasions we have miserably
learnt from our foe to be prudent henceforth and not to allow
ourselves to relax so that we indulge in the desire of conso-
lation or to be defeated by hunger however we may be incited
by it ; or to be removed from the place of our solitude unto
a place safe against such accidents, thinking out reasons and
devising means for turning our back to the desert. Such thoughts
are manifest machinations of Satan. But if thou remainest in
the desert, thou wilt not be tested. For thou seest no woman
287 in the desert nor anything that does harm to thy behaviour,
nor [doest thou hear] evil sounds. What hast thou to do with
the ways of Egypt and with drinking water from the Nile?
Understand what I say. Show thy foe thy training by enduring
small things then he will not demand great things from thee.
:
Constantly thou shalt have to keep the laws of these small
things, thereby throwing before his feet a bait, namely, in the

92 oN the things the exact use of which etc.
1
struggle concerning them. So he will not have rest from them,
so as to have occasion to set up dangerous snares for thee
in secret.
How is it possible that he should persuade a man, who is
not to be persuaded to go five steps outside the door of his
hut, to leave the desert or to approach unto the town And
?
he that can not be induced to look through his window from
the place of his reclusion, how should he persuade him to
leave it? He who is not to be persuaded to take food in the
late evening being desirous of vigils, how is it possible that
his deliberations should be excited so as to begin [his meals]
before the appointed time? And how is it possible that he
should induce as to important matters him who was even
ashamed to satisfy [his hunger] by contemptible food? And
how can he allure towards foreign beauty him, that even re-
fused to look at his own body? First man is vanquished by
small things when he despises them and then he causes him-
self to be driven towards serious ones. But how can he deter
from troubles that lead to death him who loves [death], and
does not care in the least to continue temporary life? Thus is
the war carried on with understanding the wise do not allow
:
their foe to invite them to great struggles. But the endurance
which they show in small things, preserves them from falling
while they perform large works. First the [solitary] desists from
constant prayer consisting in beseechings of the spirit, and then
he persuades him to despise canonical prayer [performed] by
the body at fixed times.
Firstly deliberation is relaxed, so that, within a short time,
it gives way in insignificant and small things. And when it has
given up its endurance, it will trespass in a wanton way.
Firstly the solitary will be vanquished, or rather: it will be
a trifling thing in his eyes to look at his naked body or to
contemplate the beauty of each of his limbs, without clothes
•,
or he will loose control over his senses in a vile way when
he goes to fulfill a bodily want ; or he will daringly and un-
blushingly introduce his hand within his clothes and touch his
body; and then one thing and another will happen to him.
As soon as the watchfulness of his spirit relaxes, showing
negligence in any of these things, the gate towards serious
offences will be open for him.
Our deliberations are as water, as is well known. As long

on the Things the exact use of which etc. 193
as they are confined on all sides, they proceed in their [right]
order. If they once find a small outlet, however, they escape
through it, causing breaches and ruins. For the subtle one who
is spying us and waiting, sitting night and day before our
2g9 nostrils and looking which gate will be opened for him in any
of our senses or in which of the things enumerated there will
—
appear any foulness he will of a sudden direct against us
-
his weapons. Sometimes it will be our own nature which loves
consolation and evil intercourse, and frivolity and pleasure and
relaxation, which is a fountain of affections and a sea of agi-
tation. Sometimes it will be our foe. Let us therefore vary
great labours and circumstances perilous with ruin, with slight
labours, that we may show in these small ones which are
nothing, that they may give rise to important struggles if they
are neglected, and to labours whose accomplishment is difficult,
and to intricate battles and to large ulcers. Who would not
like to have a quiet sleep at a small expense ?
O wisdom, how admirable art thou! And how thou doest
foresee all things from afar! Blessed is every one who has
found thee, who has been liberated from the torpidity of youth
that buys great detriment with a slight negligence. One of the
sages says beautifully, that once he was suddenly struck by
emotion so that thereupon he straightway sat down, for a mere
fortuitous thing, which was not of a nature to cause fear. For
this, some one in a light mood laughed at him. He answered
and said : Not of this am I afraid. I am afraid of the expe-
290 rienced fact that often negligence as to small things causes
danger of great ones. So, by my emotion and my sitting
straightway down, I have proved concerning myself that I am
awake ; and also that further on I will not neglect those things
which are not to be feared.
For philosophy is this that a man gather great consolation
for his soul by the attention he bestows on trifling things that
;
he will not slumber ere fate come and reach him ; but that
he will take in hand the previous things and will buy that
which is of importance, in exchange for a thing which will cause
injury, a little before [this happens]. Fools attach a greater
value to a little consolation which is near, than to a kingdom
which is far. It is better to bear tortures in probity, than to
relax on a comfortable royal bed in shameful baseness. For
the sages prefer death to disdain on account of neglect in
Vcrh. Afd. I.ctterk. T922 (Wcnsmclc). ij

:
^
194 0N 'riIE ' rnlN< THE EXACT USE OF WHlCII ETC.
affairs. Wake for thy life, says a philosopher; for drowsiness
of mind is cognate to real death. The divine philosopher Basi-
lius says he that is weak in small things, do not believe that
:
he will be trustworthy in great ones. Do not shrink from dying
for the sake of those things for which thou wilt live.
XXXVIII
SHORT SENTENCES CONCERNING THE DISTINCTION
291
OF THE MIND'S IMPULSES
Pusillanimity is a sign of despondency ; the mother of both
is negligence.
A timorous man shows that he suffers from two illnesses
from love of the body and from want of faith. Love of the
body is a sign of unbelief. But he that despises it, shows con-
cerning himself that he trusts God and expects the future
things.
If there is anyone who has approached God without being
troubled, try then on thy part to resemble him.
Courage of the heart and contempt for danger arise from
one of two causes either from hardness of heart, or from a
:
deep belief in God. The former is accompanied by haughtiness,
the latter by humbleness of heart.
It is impossible for a man to acquire confidence in God, if
he has not before fulfilled His will in part. Confidence in God
and manliness of heart rise from the testimony of conscience.
For on account of the true testimony of our mind we acquire
confidence in God. The testimony of the mind has its origin
therein that a man is not despised by his soul for neglect of
his duty, as far as this is possible.
If our heart does not despise us, then we are frank with
God. Frankness has its origin in a firm behaviour and in an
unstained mind.
It is hard to serve as a slave to the body. He that is
aware of his hope, though to a small extent, will refuse to
292 serve again the stern will of this hard master.
Endurance in perfect silence and preservation of solitude
arise from one of three causes from the [love of] glory among
:
fellow-men or the fervent zeal for excellence or a certain
; ;

SHORT SENTENCES CONCERNING THE DISTINCTION ETC. 195
inward working of God towards which the mind is attracted.
He that is destitute of the two latter causes, will suffer from
the first as it were by necessity.
Excellence does not consist in many manifest distinctions of
bodily performances, but in a heart prudent in its hope, ac-
companying- the works with a right intention. For often these
performances do not favour service, and the mind will be able
to gain profit even without them. But without the prudence of
the heart the body cannot profit even when it performs service.
For if there is an opportunity to perform beautiful works, a
godly man cannot refrain from showing his love, in the per-
formance of manifest deeds. The former kind is always succes-
ful the latter sometimes, and sometimes not.
;
Do not reckon it a small thing" when the causes of the
affections are afar off and removed from a man. The stirring
of the inferior limbs which comes quickly into existence, without
deliberations, that is to say impure pleasure which springs from
under a wall with fervour an — d captivates the soul with madness,
293 the will being of no use undoubtedly arises in the body
from a repleted belly.
As a strong weapon in this strife reckon this, that a man
be far from seeing women. What nature works by its power,
even the foe cannot work it. Do not think that nature will
forget till death that which God has sown and hidden in
its roots, serving for the carrying on of our race and for
testing us by strife. So every desire, whatever it be, is lulled
to sleep in our limbs by keeping things at a distance ; and its
memory is given over to absorption and oblivion.
Thoughts of far off things which make a simple passage
through the mind, are different from the dark and cold impulses
that arise from the soul itself. Those thoughts also which arise
from living contact which immerses the mind in a sight not
to be forgotten and which excites passion near-at-hand, feeding
it as oil feeds the flame of the lamp which was already flickering
and nearly extinguished, are different from the stirring of the
sea of the body through the impulses which agitate it against
the ship of the mind.
The emotionability which exclusively rises from nature and
which by God the creator has been deposited in us in order
to educate the world of the body, is not able, without an in-
crease from without, to bereave the will of its clearness, to

;
tg6 Shout sentences Concerning tiIe distinction etc.
confuse it so that it lose its chastity. For God does not impart
strength to nature so that it overcome the virtuous will.
294 But when a man is defeated by anger and by desire, it is
not that which lies in nature which compels him to leave
nature's domain and to cut the bonds of duty, but it is some-
thing which we add to nature by the intermediary of the will.
All that God has made, He has made beautiful and in due
proportions. And as long as the measure of natural things is
rightly preserved in us they do not cause us to be swept
from the way of God's law as it were by a deluge ; only
peaceful impulses stir in a body provided with the faculty of
emotions, so long as we only know that passion exists, but
not so when we also experience that it allures, or that it
troubles the course of chastity and that it causes confusion or
that it changes the state of peace into anger. If, however, we
sometimes crave for things of the senses which are usually the
source of unnatural anger, or for copious food and drink, or
for constantly having the opportunity of seeing a woman near
us, or of hearing tales ab — out her which use to enflame in the
body the fire of desires then we cause the natural state of
peace to be changed into that of bestiality, be it on account
of the many humours in the arteries, or by various sights of
[worldly] things.
It occurs also on account of that abandonment that arises
from presumption. But this does not really belong to this cate-
gory. The former cases we call strife for freedom and they
belong to the common way of nature. Strife through abandon-
ment arising from presumption we experience when we are
occupied by labours and watchfulness for a long time and
295 then, in spite of them, the force of desire rushes in upon us
with unnatural vehemence. But in other cases such events take
place on account of our relaxation.
When nature is augmented in force by the senses or by the
belly, it is not to be persuaded to keep henceforth the original
measure of its stamp. He that rejects troubles and loneliness
is involuntarily compelled to love sins. Without these we are
not able to remain far from spiritual allurements. The latter
diminish in accordance with the growth of the former. For
troubles dissipate the pleasure of the affections; consolation,
on the other hand, strengthens and induces them.
So it is clear that God and His angels rejoice at troubles

SHORT SENTENCES CONCERNING THE DISTINCTION ETC. I 97
Satan and his servants, however, at consolation. For if God's
commandments are performed under bodily tortures and we
reject these, it is clear that we contrive to reject Him that is
the giver of the commandments. As by the affections, which
are the offspring of consolation, we annihilate that which is
the cause of excellence, namely hardship, so we make room
for the affections to the same extent as we admit consolation.
For in a tortured body deliberations cannot be distracted by
idle things. When a man bears tortures with gladness, he has
also strength enough to check the deliberations; because even
the deliberations do not abhor labours.
Thus, when a man flogs himself with troubles, on account
of the recollection of his previous sins, God, on His side, will
296 care for his peace
;
because He rejoices when He sees that the
sinner himself has executed a judgment against himself because
—
of his deviation from His way a sign of repentance. And
as he greatly troubles himself, so to the same extent the signs
of honour granted to him by God, will increase. Every joy
which is not caused by excellence will at once stir emotions of
desire in him that has found it. This is to be understood of
all desires connected with the affections, not of the natural
ones only.
XXXIX
HELPFUL ADVICE BASED ON LOVE
Hardships for the sake of the good are loved as the good
itself. Nobody can acquire real renunciation save him that is
determined in his mind to bear troubles with pleasure. Nobody
can bear trouble save him that believes that there is some-
thing more excellent than bodily consolation which he shall
acquire in reward for trouble. F>ery one that has devoted
himself to renunciation, will first perceive the love of trouble
stir within himself; thereupon the thought of renunciating all
worldly things will take shape in him. Every one who comes
near unto trouble will at first be confirmed in faith ; then he
will come near unto trouble. He that renunciates [worldly]
things without renunciating the senses, sight and hearing, he
prepares twofold trouble for himself and he will find tribulation

igS HELPFUL ADVICE BASED ON LOVE
in a twofold measure. Or rather while he refrains from the
:
use of things, he delights in them through the senses and by
;
the affections which they cause he experiences the same from
297 them that he had to endure in reality before because the
;
recollection of their customs is not effaced from the mind. If
then imaginary representations existing in the mind alone can
torture man, apart from the things corresponding to them in
reality, what shall we say when the real things are close at
hand
?
Beautiful therefore is solitary life and very helpful, because
it silences the deliberations with force and gives us strength
to train ourselves in endurance and teaches a man patience
;
by the exercise given by cruel troubles, which accompany the
life of the solitary necessarily.
Do not seek the advice of him that is not thy fellow in
behaviour, though he be very prudent. A layman who has
experienced things is more to be trusted than a sage who
speaks on the basis of theoretical knowledge but without ex-
perience.
What is experience? Experience is not this that a man goes
and touches things, without acquiring knowledge concerning
their advantages and their defects and without remaining with
them during a certain time. How often the faces of things give
the impression of defect, whereas within them is found matter
full of advantages. In the same way are to be judged things
of the opposite aspect.
Many are those who from profitable things gather defects.
Neither is the testimony of these concerning their knowledge
to be trusted. This is only the case with him that has learned
to examine things with patient distinction. Not all man's advice,
therefore, is to be trusted ; but [only] that of him who has
behaved well before, who has knowledge founded upon expe-
rience in all things, who does not love himself, or who does
not shun disdain.
298 As often as thou findest thy course in peace, without varia-
tions, then be suspicious. For thou art deviating from the divine
ways trodden by the weary footsteps of the saints. The more
thou proceedest on the way towards the city of the kingdom
and approachest its neighbourhood, this will be the sign : that
thou meetest hard temptations. And the more thou approachest,
the more thou wilt find difficulties.

HELPFUL ADVICE BASED ON LOVE 199
So, as often as thy soul on its way perceives varying states
which cause difficulty thou must know that thy soul has secretly
been advanced to a higher state and that it has acquired a gift
of increase in comparison with the degree it occupied before.
The hard temptations into which God brings the soul are
in accordance with the greatness of His gifts. If there is a
weak soul which is not able to bear a very hard temptation
and God deals meakly with it, then know with certainty that,
as it is not capable of bearing a hard temptation, so it is not
worthy of a large gift. As great temptations have been with-
drawn from it, so large gifts are also withdrawn from it. God
never gives a large gift and small temptations. So temptations
are to be classed in accordance with gifts. Thus from the
hardships to which thou hast been subjected thou mayest
understand the measure of the greatness which thy soul has
reached. In accordance with affection is consolation.
What then ? Temptation, then gifts ; or gifts and afterwards
temptation ? Temptation does not come if the soul has not
received secretly greatness above its previous rank, as well as
We
299 the spirit of adoption as sons '). have a proof of it in the
temptation of our Lord and of the Apostles for they were
;
not allowed to be tempted before they had received the Comfor-
ter. Those who partake of good have also to bear temptations.
Along with good are the oppressions [in behalf of itj. So it
has pleased God, who is wise in all things.
Thus is the state of things and accordingly, the appercep-
;
tion of temptations is anterior to the apperception of gifts, in
order to test freedom. Grace never reaches a man before he
has tasted temptations. In reality it is anterior; to the apper-
ception it is posterior.
It is true therefore, that there are with thee at those times
two opposite feelings, not resembling one another. What are
they? Joy and fear. Joy, because thou findest thyself as appears
from the sign of the temptations going the way that has been
trodden by the saints, nay even by the saviour of the world.
Fear, lest thou be tempted by these temptations through haugh-
tiness. But the humble are gifted with prudence by grace, so
as to be able to recognize the distinctions of these things,
namely [to distinguish] between the temptations that arise from
1) Cf. Rom. 8,15

200 HELPFUL ADVICE I'.ASKD ON LOVK
haughtiness, and cheeks that burn from love. For the temp-
tations that serve to improve behaviour are to be distinguished
from those temptations which are permitted [by God] with the
purpose of overcoming the presumption of the heart.
The temptations which take place under paternal control and
serve to educate the soul, to train and to try it, so that it
becomes illustrious, are dejection, bodily weariness, relaxation
:
300 of the limbs, despondency, confusion of mind, bodily pains,
temporary despair, darkness of deliberations, deprivation of
human help '), want of bodily provisions and so on. For by
these man acquires a solitary soul and humbleness and a mor-
tified heart; and these things try him by the love of the cre-
ator and the governor administers them to those to whom
;
they are sent, in accordance with the force necessary to bear
them. In them are mingled consolations and distress, light and
darkness, struggles and help. In short they make narrow and
:
they enlarge, which is the sign of the increase of help. The
temptations which happen by permission unto those who venture
to puff themselves up in their mind before the bounty of the
author of our boons so as to become injuriously haughty
—
regarding His boons are the following the manifest temp-
:
tations of demons which lie without the domain of the psychic
forces, so that [those who are tempted] are destitute of the
force which imparts to them prudence a vivid sensation of
;
the impulses of fornication which are let loose in order to
suppress their presumption; a being led easily to anger; the
setting up of the will love of victory in dispute rashness a
; ; ;
heart inclined towards contempt complete aberration of the
;
mind abuse of Him whose honour be blessed foolish thoughts
; ;
full of jest, or rather weeping contempt as to men [endan-
; ;
gering] personal honour by impudence ridiculousness through
;
many contrivances of the demons, secretly and manifestly love
;
of mingling and intercourse with the world frequent evasions
;
301 of foolish words; novel individual inventions and false pro-
phecies ; frequent promises above one's power ; in the bodily
sphere a continually hard involved fate most difficult of solu-
tion perpetual meetings with evil and ungodly persons falling
; ;
into the hands of evil persons perpetual emotions of the heart,
;
caused by sudden fear without reason ; repeated heavy falls
l) This enumeration has been taken over by Bar Ilebraeus, Book of the Dove, p. 528

HELPFUL ADVICK ISASKL) ON LOVE 201
from rocks and high places and the like, such as destroys the
body the inability of the heart to lean on God's care and to
;
confide as is becoming to faith ; in short : all unbearable forces
which it is above one's power to withstand, such as are let
loose against the solitary and his surroundings.
All that I have expounded belongs to the temptations of
haughtiness ; the beginning of them shows itself in a man as
soon as he becomes wise in his own eyes. He gets into all
these evils according as he gives way to this deliberation ').
So by distinguishing between thy temptations thou wilt gain
insight into the narrow paths of thy mind. If thou lookest on
and observest some [of these temptations] on thy mind's paths,
thou must know that the quantity of temptation is in accor-
dance with the defiling working of presumption.
Hear also another consideration. All hardships and troubles
A
which are not borne with patience, cause twofold torture.
man's patience throws off his distress. Want of courage is the
source of tortures. Patience is the source of consolations, a
302 certain strength born from courage of the heart. It is difficult
for a man to find in his own soul in troubles, if it be not given
him by God, that which is found through supplication and the
pouring out of tears.
If God decrees that a man shall be troubled in a larger
measure, He gives him into the hand of faintheartedness. And
this will give birth to great despondency which gives the feeling
of psychic suffocation-, all these things taste after Hell. There-
upon the spirit of confusion is let loose against [the solitary],
and from it rise innumerable temptations : perturbance, anger,
abuse, vituperation, oscillating deliberations, moving from place
to place, and the like. If thou sayest : Who is the cause of
all these? I say: thou because thou didst not care to find out
;
the means to heal them. There is one remedy for all these
and by it a man will at once find consolation within himself.
What is this then? Humility of heart. Without it, it is not
possible for a man to demolish the fence of these evil things,
for he would find them far too strong. Be not angry with me
for telling thee the truth: thou never hast sought this within
thy soul. If thou wilt, follow it, then thou shalt see how it
causes the destruction of thy evils.
1) viz. the deliberation of haughtiness

;
202 HELPFUL ADVICE BASED ON LOVE
In accordance with thy humility will be given thee en-
durance in thy distress and in accordance with thy endurance
;
its weight will be lightened from thy soul which will be con-
303 soled in its troubles; and in accordance with the consolation
of thy soul, thy love in God will increase ; and in accordance
with thy love thy spiritual joy will increase. When our com-
passionate Father is of the will to relieve those who are real
sons in their temptations, He does not take them away from
them, but He imparts to them endurance under temptations,
and all that good which they receive through it, to the per-
fection of their souls. May Christ in His grace make us worthy
of bearing evils for the sake of His love, with thanksgivings
of the heart. Amen.
XL
EXPOSITION CONCERNING THE DEGREES OF THE
PATH, NAMELY CONCERNING THE POWER OF
MINISTRATION OF EACH OF THEM
Bodily discipline in solitude purifies the body from the
material elements in it. Mental discipline makes the soul humble
and purifies it from the material impulses that tend towards
decaying things, by changing their affectible nature into motions
of contemplation. And this will bring the soul near to the
nakedness of the mind that is called immaterial contemplation
this is spiritual discipline. It elevates the intellect above earthly
things and brings it near to primordial spiritual contemplation
;
it directs the intellect towards God by the sight of unspeakable
glory and it delights spiritually in the hope of future things,
[thinking of what and how each of them will be l
j ).
Bodily labours are called bodily discipline unto God. For
304 they serve for the purification of the body through the service
of excellence which is manifest personal works, by which man
is purified from the pus of the flesh. Mental discipline is labour
of the heart. It is the thinking, without cessation, of the great
coming judgment, in constant prayer of the heart, and ofGod's
providence and care for this world in its individuals and in its
i) The Greek translation has the right division of the text here

EXPOSITION CONCERNING THE DEGREES ETC. 2C>3
species. This is also the regarding of the domain of the inner
affections, lest any of them pass into the hidden and spiritual
place. This is the labour of the heart which is called mental
discipline.
By this labour of discipline, which is called psychic service,
the heart is subtilized and torn away from participation in
decay, viz. in the praeternatural affections from here onwards
;
the heart begins to be often set in emotion by insight into
the things of the senses which were created to the purpose of
the education of the body and which administer strength to
the four elements which are in the body.
Spiritual discipline is service without the senses ; this is what
lias been written by the Fathers that when the mind of the
,
saints was gifted with personal contemplation, then the heavi-
ness of body was taken away. And further on sight will be
spiritual sight.
Personal contemplation he uses in the sense of contemplation
concerning the primordial creation of nature. From there one
is easily moved onwards toward what is called solitary know-
ledge which is, according to a clear interpretation, ecstasy in
God, this is the order of that high future state which will be
given in freedom that lives in immortality, in that way of life
305 which will be after the resurrection. It will consist therein, that
from that point onwards human nature will not be cut off from
constant ecstasy in God, to mingle itself with any created being.
If there were any other thing equal to Him, nature would some-
times follow Him, sometimes His equals. When, however, the
beauty of all which exists in that future order of things, is
inferior to His beauties, how should it be possible for the mind
not to fix its gaze exclusively on Him ? What then ? Should
mortality trouble it, or the heaviness of the flesh , or the
remembrance of kindred, or natural wants, or the adversities
which overtake it ; or the distraction of ignorance, or the defi-
ciency of nature, or the distraction caused by the elements, or
intercourse with one another, or the influence of dejection, or
—
the weariness of the flesh? If now in this world while all
—
these things are thus the veil of the affections is sometimes
withdrawn from before the eyes of the spirit so that —it gazes
at the glory, and the mind is drawn away in ecstasy then,
without doubt, if God had not limited the duration of these
moments in this life, man would not come back from that

204 EXPOSITION CONCERNING THE DEGREES ETC.
state ] ) his whole life, if he were allowed. Now when all these
[earthly] things exist no longer and that endless order [has been
established], and when we pers — onally and practically abide —in
the habitations of the kingdom if our behaviour be worthy
how then should the spirit find a way to remove itself from
the wondrous sight of God and to dwell with any other? Woe
306 to us, who do not know for what state we are destined, recko-
ning as something this life of sickness and this animal state,
and the world with its troubles and evils and pleasures.
O Christ, who art the only strong one, blessed is the man
whom thou supportest and in whose heart are the steps towards
thee. Turn thou, o Lord, our face away from the world by
desire of Thee, so that we see it as it is, without taking
shadows for truth. Throw, o Lord, zeal into our heart before
death comes, that at the time of our departure we may know
for what purpose our entrance in and our departure from this
world have served. Then, fulfilling the work to which we were
called in accordance with thy aim in placing us in this life first,
we shall hope, with a mind full of confidence, to receive the
great things which, according to the promises of the scriptures,
in the second creation are prepared by Thy love, things the
recollection of which we preserve with mystic faith.
Bodily purity is to be clean from filth. Psychic purity is to
be free from hidden affections in the spirit. Purity of mind is
to be purified by revelations from any emotion unto things
which, in view of their material nature, lie in the domain of
the senses. Children are pure in body and as to their soul
they can be without affections. Yet no one will call them pure
in mind. Purity of mind is perfection through training in
307 heavenly contemplation, so that the mind without the senses
receives impulses from the spiritual powers of those worlds
above, powers which are amazing, surpassing number, distin-
guished in demeanour, mingled in invisible service, subject to
many variations at all times, on account of the motion of the
divine revelations.
1) LUt. from there. Cf. l'lotinus, Enncadcs, VI, 9 § 9

A LETTER WHtCIt HE WROTE TO ONE ETC. $0$
XLI
A LETTER WHICH HE WROTE TO ONE OF THE
BRETHREN WHO LOVED SOLITUDE CONCERNING
HOW SATAN CONTRIVES TO DIVERT THE ZEALOUS
FROM CONSTANT SOLITUDE UNDER THE PRETEXT
OF THE LOVE OF RELATIVES AND HONOURED MEN,
AND THAT IT IS BECOMING THAT ALL SHOULD BE
DESPISED IN THE EYES [OF THE SOLITARY] COM-
PARED WITH THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD WHICH
IS
FOUND IN SOLITUDE AS MAY BE SEEN IN THE
EXAMPLE OF OUR ANCESTORS
Because I know that thou lovest solitude and that Satan,
knowing the intention of thy mind, impedes thee in many respects
under the pretext of excellence, in order to divert thee from
this comprehensive and manifold excellence, o virtuous brother,
I was anxious to help thy good will as one limb helps its
partner, with an excellent word, which I have received from
prudent men and from the writings of the Fathers and from
experience. For if a man does not despise honour and dis-
honour and bear for the sake of solitude abuse and derision
and loss, nay even blows, and become an object of laughter
and be reckoned mad and foolish by those who see him, he
308 cannot master the advantages of solitude. For if a man once
open the door to [worldly] things, Satan will not cease to bring
unto him men under every pretext, a continual, innumerable
series of associations. Therefore, my brother, if thou lovest the
veracious discipline of solitude without distraction and shocks
and sudden pauses, as it has been eminently practised by the
ancients, thou wilt be able to carry out this laudable desire
by trying to resemble thy Fathers and by retaining in thy
mind, as if it were written down, the memory of their histories
[ascertaining] that those of them who loved complete solitude,
did not care to practise love of their fellows at the cost of
distracting themselves, neither were they ashamed of avoiding
such persons as were reputed to be in honour.
And though they were thus, devoted to complete solitude,
yet they were not deemed by those who know and are wise,

2o6 A LETTER Wl-IlCIt HE WROTE TO ONE ETC.
to despise their brethren, nor were they thought ofas scorners or
destitute of distinctions, as it was pretended by some in the way of
apology against those who honour quiet and reclusion more than
meeting their fellows. For the man that has experienced the
quiet of his cell does not avoid meetings because he despises
his fellow, but because of the fruits he gathers from solitude.
How did they practise reclusion ? Aba Arsenius would not
meet with any one. Aba Theodore, when meeting anyone, was
like a sharp sword he did not greet anyone when he happened
;
309 to be outside his cell. But the holy Arsenius did not even
greet him that came to greet him. Once one of the Fathers
went to see Aba Arsenius who opened, thinking that it was
his servant. When, however, he saw who it was he prostrated
himself. And when the visitor sought to persuade him, saying:
Rise, o father, that I may greet thee, were it only in the
doorway, then I will go, the saint protested saying : I will not
rise until thou goest and he did not rise until the other had
;
left him and was gone. Thus the blessed one acted, lest they
should come again if he — once gave way to them.
,One of the Fathers' pay careful attention to this phrase
lest thou think perhaps that Aba Arsenius despised his visitor
on account of his mean estate ; but it was one of the Fathers
who spoke to him.
But we have also a strong proof from another side, lest
thou say that he despised one, but received another favourably
on account of his high position and conversed with him. No,
in his reclusion he avoided alike all kinds of association ; and
in his eyes to despise the association with high or low for the
sake of solitude, and to bear the reproaches of all in view of
the honour of solitude and silence, was one and the same thing.
We know namely that once the blessed Theophilus, the arch-
bishop of Alexandria, visited him accompanied by the judge
of that place, because they longed for the honour of seeing
the saints. As he sat with them he did not comfort them
even with a single word such as would have been fitting their
high position, although they were very eager to hear his speech.
310 And when the archbishop tried to bring him to speech, the
solitary was silent for a short time, and answered, saying If
:
I speak to you, will you remember what I say ? They promised
to do so. Then the solitary said to them Wherever you hear
:
that Arsenius is, do not come near to that place.

:
A LETTER WHtCT-I HE WROTE TO ONE ETC. 207
Doest thou see the wonderful way of the man? Doest thou
see how he despised the honour of men The blessed one
?
knew how to gather the fruits of solitude without a thought
to the fact that he was in the presence of the katholikos, the
head of the whole church. But he thought thus : I am now
dead to the world ; what profit will a dead man give the
living? He was vituperated for this in a loving way by the
blessed Macarius who said to him Why doest thou flee from
:
us ? The holy solitary made a wonderful praiseworthy apology
God knows that I love you but I cannot be with God and
with men.
Another time the archbishop sent him a message concerning
this subject. The solitary answered, saying: ,If thou comest I
shall open the door to thee. But if I open to thee, I shall
open to every one. And if I open to every one, I shall not
remain here'. This wonderful doctrine he had heard from none
other than from a divine voice, saying ,Arsenius, flee from
:
men and thou shalt live'. None of the idle men who seek an
occupation, will venture to refute this message by his objec-
tions or to speak against it, as if to seek peace proceeded
3»i from human invention. For this is a doctrine from heaven.
The opinion that this was said to him with a view to reclu-
sion and retreat from the world only, not with the intention
that he should also avoid the brethren, is refuted thereby that,
when he had retreated from the world and was abiding in the
monastery, he again prayed to our Lord in order that he
should know to live well. ,0 Lord", he said, , teach me to live',
thinking that now he would hear another message. The divine
voice proclaimed the same words again, adding as in expla-
nation ,Flee and be silent and keep in solitude. Though the
:
sight of and intercourse with the brethren be very profitable
to thee, still intercourse with them is not as profitable as with-
drawal from them'.
When the blessed Arsenius, while he was still in the world,
had heard by divine revelation the order to withdraw from it,
and when the same had been said to him while he was with
the brethren, he knew certainly that in order to acquire a
steadfast life, not only withdrawal from lay people was neces-
sary but from every human being. Lest any one should venture
to speak against the divine voice, it was also said to Aba
Antonius in a revelation ,If thou desirest to be in solitude,
:

$0& A LETfEk vVlltClt itE WROTE TO ONE ETC.
do not only go to the Theba'i's, but to the heart of the desert.
If now God in this way commands us to witdraw from all, and
wishes that His friends dwell in solitude, who should then,
for other reasons, cling to intercourse and the vicinity of men ?
312 If watchfulness was profitable and withdrawal helpful to Anto-
nius and Arsenius, how much more then to the weak? And if
the solitude of those whose words and the help that is inspired
by the sight of them the whole world needs, is estimated by
God higher than their usefulness to mankind in its entirety,
how much more will this be the case with him that is not able
to guard even his own person properly.
We
know another of the saints whose natural brother was
ill. He lived as a recluse in a different cell. During the whole
period of his brother's sickness he restrained his mercy, so that
he did not go out to visit him. When the sick man was on
the point of departing from this world, he sent his brother a
message to this effect : Come that I may see thee before I
depart the world, even if it be in the night. Then I will take
leave from thee and go to rest. The blessed one, however,
was not to be persuaded even at this time, when natural
mercy usually is stirred, to transgress the voluntary borders,
saying : ,If I go out, my heart will not be pure before God,
for I despise visiting spiritual brethren, should I then honour
nature above Christ? So his brother died without his having
seen him.
No one, therefore, should consider the weakness of feelings
as an insuperable and invincible reason, nor as a providential
institution, implying the denial of solitude. If the saints subdue
nature which is so strong, and Christ, though despised in His
children, loves to be where solitude is honoured, what other
necessity should then exist which could not de despised when
it presents itself? The commandment: Love the Lord thy God
313 with thy whole soul and with thy whole heart *) and more — than
the whole world and nature and what belongs to nature is
accomplished when thou abidest in solitude. And also the com-
mandment ordering the love of our fellow men, is included in
it. Wilt thou acquire the love of thy fellow-man, according to
the commandment of the Gospel, within thyself, then withdraw
from him. Then the flame of his love will burn in thee and
i) Deuteronomy 6,5

A LETTER VVHtCfi HE WROTE TO ONE ETC. 20C)
thou wilt run to see him as if thou wouldst see the angel of
light. Doest thou further desire that thy beloved ones long
after thee? See their faces at fixed days only. Verily, expe-
rience is the teacher of all. Be in health.
XLII
THE ANSWER HE SENT HIS NATURAL AND SPIRI-
TUAL BROTHER WHO HAD TRIED TO PERSUADE
HIM IN LETTERS THAT HE SHOULD VISIT HIM IN
THE INHABITED WORLD BECAUSE HE LONGED TO
SEE HIM
We
are not strong, as thou supposest, o blessed one. Per-
haps thou art acquainted with my weakness, but thou makest
not much of my destruction. Constantly thou askest me this,
placing nature above the thought which once burned in thee,
showing thereby that thou doest not consider it even as a
matter to be treated carefully, though to us it seems to be a
matter of care. Do not ask from me, o my brother, what
gives consolation to body and mind, but let me seek the sal-
vation of my soul. Yet a short time and we shall have passed
away from this world. It is not unknown to thee how many
persons I should meet, if I went to thy dwelling-place ; how
many sorts of people and of places, before I should have
;i4 returned unto my place ; and by m — eeting them, what cause for
thought my ' soul would receive my soul, that would be
disturbed by the affections which would be awakened in it,
after it has been left in peace by them a little. That the sight
of lay people injures the solitary, is a fact with which thou art
acquainted; not just the sight of women, but also of men.
Behold how many varying states pass through the mind of
him that has for a long time been alone with his soul and
then suddenly comes in contact with these things, hearing and
seeing what he is not wont to see and to hear. If meeting his
fellow brethren injures him that is engaged in the struggle
and still wrestles with his foe, if the brethren are not in con-
cordance with his aim, into what pit would we fall, that have
to be freed from the sting of our foe? Especially those [among
Vcrh. Afd. Lettcrk. 192a (Wcnsinck). 14

2IO THE ANSWER HE SENT HIS NATURAL ETC.
us] that know these things by long experience. Therefore I am
not to be persuaded to do this without necessity. Our heart
does not err after those who say that hearing and seeing will
not harm us and that, in the desert or in the inhabited world,
within our cell or without it, we are alike in our deliberations
on account of our being at rest against perturbation as long
as we do not experience evil varying states and as long as
we do not perceive the meeting with persons and things by
the shock of affections. Those who say this, do not even know
it when they receive a blow. But as to us, we have not yet
reached this psychic health. We suffer from rotting abscesses;
which, if they be left without bandages but for one day, so
that they appeared from under the plasters and the bonds,
would abound with worms.
XLIII
PROFITABLE WORDS FULL OF SPIRITUAL WISDOM
3iS
Faith is the gate of the mysteries. What the bodily eye is
for the things of the senses, the same is faith in connection
with the treasures hidden to the eyes of the mind.
We
possess two psychic eyes, as the bathers say, just as we
possess two bodily eyes. But both have not the same purpose
as to sight.
With one we see the hidden glory of God which is con-
cealed in the things of nature, His power and Mis wisdom,
and His eternal care for us which by His peculiar providence
is directed unto us. With the same eye we also see the spiri-
tual classes of our fellow-beings.
With the other we see the glory of His holy nature. When
our Lord desires to give us initiation to the spiritual mysteries,
He opens in our mind the ocean of faith.
As a grace beyond a grace has repentance been given to
man. Repentance is being born anew in God. That of which
we have received the pledge by baptism, we receive as a gift
by repentance. Repentance is the gate of mercy which is
opened to all who seek it. Through this gate we go in to
divine mercy. Apart from this entrance it is not possible to find

:
PROFITABLE WORDS FULL OF SPIRITUAL WISDOM 21 I
mercy. Because all have sinned, according to the words of
scripture, and are justified freely by grace J ). Repentance is a
second grace; it is born in the heart from faith and fear. Fear
is the paternal rod which guides us up to the spiritual Eden.
316 When we have arrived there, it leaves us and returns. Eden
is the divine love wherein is the paradise of all goods, where
the blessed Paul was sustained by supernatural food. When he
had eaten from the tree of life which is there, he exclaimed
eye has not seen, nor ear heard neither have entered into the
heart of man the things which God hath prepared for them
that love him 2 ). Adam was bereft of this tree by the promise
of the Devil. The tree of life is the divine love which Adam
lost by his fall, after which he worked and wearied himself.
Those who are bereft of divine love are still eating the
bread that is won by the sweat of their labour, even though
they work righteousness, as was commanded to the head of
our race when he lost it by his fall. Until we find love, we
work in the earth with her thorns. Among thorns we sow and
reap, even if we sow the seed of righteousness. Perpetually
we are pricked by them, even if we are justified, and live
with sweat on our faces.
When, however, we have found love, we eat the heavenly
bread and we are sustained without labour and without wea-
riness. Meavenly bread is that which has descended from
heaven and which gives the world life ; this is the food of
angels. He that has found love eats Christ at all times and
becomes immortal from thence onwards. F"or whoever eats of
this bread shall not taste death in eternity. Blessed is he that
317 has eaten from the bread of love which is Jesus. Whoever is
fed with love is fed with Christ, who is the allgoverning God.
Witness is John who says : God is Love 3 ). Thus he smells
life from God, that lives with love in this creation. He breathes
here of the air of resurrection. In this air the righteous will
delight at resurrection. Love is the kingdom of which our Lord
spoke when He symbolically promised the disciples that, they
would eat in His kingdom ,you shall eat and drink at the
:
table of my kingdom'. What should they eat, if not love?
Love is sufficient to feed man in stead of food and drink. This
is the wine that gladdens the heart of man. Blessed is he
1) Cf. Rom. 3,23 st[. 2) 1 Cor. 2,9 3) I John 4, 16

212 PROFITABLE WORDS FULL Of SPIRITUAL WISDOM
who has drunk from this wine. This is the wine from which
the lascivious have drunk and they became chaste, the sinners
and they forgot the ways of offence, the drunkards and they
became fasters; the rich and they became desirous of poverty,
the poor and they became rich in hope the sick and they
;
became valiant; the fools and they became wise.
As it is not possible to cross the ocean without a boat or
a ship, so no one can cross towards love, without fear. This
foetid sea, which lies between us and the intelligible paradise,
we cross in the boat of repentance, which has fear for a rudder.
If the rudder of fear does not govern this ship of repentance,
in which we cross the sea of this world towards God, we
shall be drowned in the foetid sea. Repentance is the ship,
fear is her governor, love is the divine port.
;i8 Fear places us in the ship of repentance and makes us cross
the foetid sea of the world and brings us in the divine port
which is love, towards which look all those who are weary and
crushed by repentance.
When we have reached love, we have reached God and
our way is ended and we have passed unto the island which
lieth beyond the world, where is the Father and the Son and
the Holy Ghost; to whom be glory and dominion. That He
make us worthy to fear Him and to love Him. Amen.
XLIV
CONCERNING HOW MANY DEGREES KNOWLEDGE
HAS AND CONGERNING THE DEGREES OF FAITH
There is a knowledge which is anterior to faith and there
is a knowledge which is born from faith. The knowledge an-
terior to faith, is natural knowledge ; that which is born from
faith, is spiritual knowledge.
What is natural knowledge? Knowledge which distinguisheth
<rood from evil and which is also called natural distinction.
God has implanted in rational nature to know good from evil,
naturally,without instruction, yet this knowledge increases through
instruction. There is no one in whom this knowledge] is not
|
active ; and this is the force of the knowledge of the rational

CONCERNING HOW MANV DKGRKKS ETC. 2 r3
soul by nature, namely the distinction between good and evil
is stirring in it naturally, without ceasing. Those who are de-
fective in this respect are beneath the rank of reason. Those
whom
in this is found, stand upright in psychic nature, and
319 there has not been destroyed in them that which was given
by God unto psychic nature, to the honour of His reason.
lhose who have destroyed this knowledge which distingui-
shes between good and evil, are scorned by the prophet man
:
has no insight in his own honour 1 The honour of rational
).
nature is the faculty to distinguish between good and evil.
Rightly the prophet compares those who have destroyed this
faculty with the brutes who possess no distinguishing and ra-
tional soul. On account of this faculty we are naturally able
to find the way of God, and this is the natural knowledge
which is anterior to faith and this is the way unto God. On
account of the fact that a man knows how to distinguish be-
tween good and evil, he receives faith. Witness is the force of
nature to the fact that it is beautiful for a man to believe in
Him that has created all these things and that he acknowledge
the words of His commandments and performs them.
From the fact that he believes this, is born the fear of God.
When man clings to the service of the fear of God, and by
service proceeds to some extent in it, the spiritual knowledge
is born of which we have said that it is born from faith. Not
that it is simply born from faith. From simple faith only spi-
ritual knowledge is not born, but from faith fear of God is
born. And when we begin with the service of the fear of God,
from the service of the fear of God spiritual knowledge is born,
according to the word of the blessed commentator 2 When
) :
.a man possesses the will to cling to the fear of God and an
upright mind he will easily receive the revelation of hidden
320 things. The revelation of hidden things he calls spiritual know-
ledge. Not that the fear of God brings this forth, it is not
possible to bring forth that which is not implied in nature.
But knowledge is to given gratuitously for the service of the
fear of God.
When s ) thou inquirest well thou wilt find that the service
of the fear of God is repentance. And spiritual knowledge is,
as we have said, that of which we have received the pledge
1) Cf. Psalms 49,12,20 2) Theodore of Mopsuestia 3) Cf. Introduction

;
2 14 CONCERNING HOW MANY DKGRKKS ETC.
in baptism and which we receive really by repentance. The
gift of which we have said l ) that we receive it by repentance,
is spiritual knowledge, which is given gratuitously for the ser-
vice of the fear of God. Spiritual knowledge is apperception
of the things which are hidden. When a man perceives the
things which are unseen but most profitable, after which spiri-
tual knowledge is called, by this apperception is born a diffe-
rent faith. Not that it is contrary to the old faith, nay it even
corroborates it. It is called the faith of sight. Hitherto there was
hearing ; now there is sight. Sight is more true than hearing.
All these things are born from that knowledge which dis-
tin&guishes between g o ood and evil and which is stirring in na-
ture. And this is the seed of excellence, as it has been fc> called.
But when we conceal this by our will which loves desire, we
lose all this good.
With this knowledge are connected a perpetual stabbing of
the heart; distress and grief; fear of God; shame before nature
grief at the transitory things which [occupied the mind] before;
}2i zeal for that which is becoming; perpetual remembrance of
death, torturing thoughts of that transition and care for its
provisions passionate beseeching of God that we enter well
;
that gate through which all nature has to pass contempt of
;
the world and noble strife for the sake of excellence. All these
things are found in this natural knowledge. Man has to exa-
mine his discipline in view of these and when he is in accord
with them, he goes in the way of nature. When he climbs
higher and reaches love, he leaves the domain of nature and
strife, fear and fatfgue leave him alone.
In accordance with what has been said man has to measure
his things [in order to know] in which way he is walking; in
that which is beneath nature, in nature, or above nature.
Through these distinctions which have been clearly expounded,
a man may easily understand what the discipline of his whole
life has to be. When thou art not in the things of nature
which have been described here, nor in the things above
nature it is clear that thou dwellest beneath nature.
p- 3'5

I'ROFITAliLK ADVICK 2 I5
XLV
PROFITABLE ADVICK
There is no good impulse which does not fall in the heart
as a gift from on high. There is no evil deliberation which
A
does not approach the heart in the way of a temptation.
man that has attained the knowledge of his weakness has
attained the summit of humility.
The conductor of the signs of God's goodness unto man is
322 a heart which is moved by perpetual gratefulness. The con-
ductor of temptations unto the soul is the impulse of rebellion
which is constantly stirring in the heart. God suffers every
weakness of man ; but He does not suffer a man who is con-
stantly murmuring, without chastising him. The soul which is
far from any splendour of knowledge, finds itself in these
impulses.
The mouth which constantly praises, receives a blessing from
God ; the heart which is constantly grateful, is inhabited by
grace.
Grace is preceded by humility chastisement is preceded by
;
presumption.
Me that is uplifted in his heart on account of knowledge,
is tempted by abuse ; he that is uplifted on account of his
excellent service, is surrounded by fornication. And he that
extols himself on account of wisdom becomes entangled in
dark traps.
The man that is far from any remembrance of God, yet
bears in his heart care for his fellow, will be of evil remem-
brance. He that honours all men by his remembrance of God
will find all men his helpers by the hidden decree of God.
He that gives an apology in behalf of the oppressed will
find an advocate in his creator. He that gives his arm to the
help of his fellow, will receive God's arm in stead of it. He
that accuses his brother on account of his evil deeds will find
God as his accuser. He that directs his brother in his inner
apartment, cures his evil he that accuses him before an as-
;
sembly makes worse his wounds. He that cures his brother
privately gives a proof of the strength of his love, but he who

2l6 PROFITAI3LE ADVICE
exposes him in the presence of his comrades betrays the force
of his envy.
A
friend that vituperates in secret is a wise physician -, but
3^3 he that cures in the presence of the public, is really a derider.
The token of compassion is forgiveness regarding all sins.
The token of an evil mind are varying utterances unto the
sinner.
He that combines with healing chastisement, chastises with
love. He whose demand bears the character of revenge, is
destitute of love. God chastises with love, not for the sake of
revenge, this is far from Him. He demands that His image ')
be healed : His anger does not endure until guidance is no
longer possible for He does not seek personal revenge. This
;
is the intention of love ; the chastisement of love aims at gui-
dance it does not aim at retribution.
;
The righteous who is wise resembles God. He never chas-
tises man in retaliation for his sin, but either in order that he
may be guided aright, or that others may be deterred. Other
than this is no chastisement. But this2 ) is regarded as its image
by the Spirit, the thought that was with God from eternity.
He that is pleased to think of God as the revenger, thinking
that he acknowledges His justice, denounces Him as destitute
of bounty. It is far from the fountain of love, the ocean full
of bounty, that the idea of retribution should be found with
Him. His aim is the guidance of men ; and if it were not that
we would be bereft of the honour of freedom, perhaps He
would even not heal us by vituperation 3 The domain of
).
freedom regarding- our deeds is the power with which frankness
supplies reason. And also the latter adores the greatness of
His bounty, because it is not His will that we rejoice at what
is His, but as it were at the merits of our own deeds. And
324 though all is His, it is not His pleasure that we should think
that we delight in what is His, but rather in what is ours.
In accordance with a man's goodness is he illuminated con-
cerning God. According as he stretches himself towards the
knowledge of God, does he approach unto freedom of soul.
He that tries to excel in beautiful things with a view to
future reward, will be easily led to deviation. He that admires
man
1)
2) chastisement on account of love
3) but by stronger methods

PKOl'TTABLK ADVICIC 217
the power of his knovvledg-e, when looking at the love which
is in God will not be puffed up in mind even if his flesh should
be cut off, nor will he deviate from excellence. He whose mind
is illuminated concerning the rents for which we are indebted
to God, descends unto the depth of humility, body and soul.
Before a man approaches unto knowledge, he will go up
and down in his discipline. When, however, he has come near
to knowledge he will wholly be raised up. Yet, however he be
raised up, his advance in knowledge will not be complete, until
the world of glory has come and he has received the whole
of his treasure.
According as a man becomes perfect in his relation to God,
will he follow Him closely. In the world of truth, He will show
him His face, not however the face of His essence. The more
the righteous advance to the vision of Him, the more they
see an enigmatic sio-ht, as an ima^e shown in a mirror. There,
however, they will see the revelation of truth.
Fire feeding upon dead wood is not easily extinguished. If
the divine blaze falls in a heart cut off from the world, its
flame is not to be extinguished and it will be even quicker
than fire. When the power of the wine penetrates into the
veins, the mind forgets the particulars of all things ; when the
525 remembrance of God has taken hold of the soul, the recollec-
tion of visible things vanishes from the heart.
The mind that has found spiritual wisdom is like a man that
has found on the ocean an equipped ship which, when he has
got aboard, brings him from the ocean of this world to the
island of the world to be. Just so the apperception of the
future things in this world, is like a small island in the ocean.
And he that has approached unto it, he will no more be vexed
by the storms of temporal phantasies.
When the merchant has accomplished his business, he hastens
to reach his home. As long as the monk still lives in the
period of his service, he has anguish [by the thought that he
|
shall have to depart the body. As soon however as he is
aware that he has redeemed his time 1 and that he has taken
)
his pledge, he longs for the world to be. As long as the
merchant is on the sea, motion dominates his limbs ; a storm
may rise and the hope of his labour may sink. As long as the
1) Cf. Eph. 5, 16; Col. 4,5

2 i S PROFITAT'.Lli ADVK'K
monk is in this world, fear dominates his service, lest a hurry-
cane be stirred against him destroying the lahour which he has
wrought from his youth till his old age. The merchant looks
towards land, the monk towards the time of his death. The
sailor gazes at the stars as long as he is sailing on the ocean,
and he directs his ship by them, that they may show him the
harbour. The monk gazes at prayer, which directs his way
[showing him] towards which harbour he has to direct his
course. At prayer the monk gazes at all times, that it may
show him the island where he may anchor his ship free from
fear and where he may take on board provisions in order to
326 direct himself towards another island. Such is the course of
the solitary as long as he is in this life. He departs from is-
land to island, and from knowledge to knowledge. And as
various islands he meets the various [kinds of] knowledge, till
he o-oes ashore and directs his course towards the city of
truth the inhabitants of which do no longer traffic, but every
one is content with his goods. Blessed he whose course is not
disturbed, on this wide ocean. Blessed is whose ship is not
wrecked and who reaches that harbour with joy.
Naked the swimmer dives into the sea in order to find a
pearl. Naked the wise monk will go through the creation in
order to find the pearl Jesus Christ Himself. When he has
found it, he will not seek to acquire any other thing. A pearl
is preserved in a treasury; the solitary's delight is in solitude.
A virgin is robbed in a crowd ; the mind of a monk in inter-
course. The bird flies to her nest from any place in order to
produce young ones, and the discerning monk hastens to his
cell in order to produce in it the fruits of life.
When the body of the serpent is crushed, it guards its head
cautiously the wise solitary guards his faith amidst all evils,
;
cautiously, because it is the head of his life.
A cloud covers the sun so much talk covers the soul which
:
has becrun to be illuminated by contemplative prayer. —
The bird whic — h is called hurbax ) is glad and delights so
327 the saces say when she leaves the inhabited places and
takes up her abode in the desert. And the soul of the solitary
receives heavenly joy when it removes itself from men and
takes up its abode in quiet places where it awaits the time
1) In Syi'iac luir^ba means at the same time desert and stoik

I'ROFITAIJLK ADvrcii; 219
of departure. It is told concerning" the bird which is called the
siren that whosoever hears her singing is allured by her in his
course in the desert, and that by the sweetness of her melodies
he forgets his life and falls down dead. This resembles what
happens'with the soul; when that heavenly sweetness falls into
it which comes from the melodies of the words of God [and
which is transmitted] by mental apperception, it follows [these
sounds] so that it forgets its bodily life and leaves the body on
account of its delight and is lifted up from this life unto God.
The life of this world is sweet to him that lives in a mate-
rial way ; not, however, so sweet as is departure from life unto
him that departs from it by perception in God. A tree will not
produce new buds until it has put off the old leaves-, and the
solitary will not produce new buds, through Jesus Christ, until
he has shaken from his heart the memory of his past.
The wind makes the fruits ripe •, and the spirit *) of God
makes ripe the fruits in the soul. The shell in which the pearl
is formed receives its full form from the air, as then saying
has it still then, it is only mere flesh. And until the heart of
the monk receives its heavenly fullness by understanding, its
328 service is still simple and it has no consolation within its shell.
The fruits of the trees are sour and disagreeable to the taste
and are not apt to be eaten till they have become sweet by
the sun ; and the first labours of repentance are bitter and
very unpleasant and without consolation to the solitary, until
they are made sweet by the contemplation which withdraws
the heart from earthly things so that it forgets itself.
The dog which licks the file drinks from his own blood ; he
does not recognize his hurt on account of the sweet taste and
;
the solitary who condescends to drink vain glory, sucks from
his own life without being aware of his hurt, because of the
momentary sweetness.
Glory on the part of worldly folk is like a rock hidden in
the sea • it is not known to the sailor before his ship is split
on it so that its bottom is pierced and it is filled with water.
It is said therefore by the Fathers, that by glory all the affec-
tions return unto the soul, that once had been vanquished and
had departed from
it.
A
small cloud covers the sphere ; but the sun which is
1) wind .ind spirit arc expressed by the same word in Syriac

220 PROFITABLE ADVICE
behind it, is nevertheless real ; and a little dejection covers
the soul yet the gladness which follows it is the more exhi-
;
larating.
The musician who plays the flute is not fed by the sound
of its melodies. And when he ceases his music his stomach is
the more hungry. And the sweetness of words without ritual
performances does not satisfy when a man no longer hears
•,
them he is the more confused.
As it is not possible for a man to drink wine without
breathing forth its odour from his mouth, so it is not possible
329 that a man becomes worthy of spiritual rest in his discipline
without the sage's perceiving a change in his state. The heart
that has received the heavenly seed is changed in its speech,
changed in its mind, changed in its discipline, changed in its
senses ; and in all that belongs to it, it is different from the
other simple men, as a man that was asleep and has awakened
from his sleep.
Do not approach the mysteriouswords in the scriptures without
prayer and without asking help from God, saying Lord, grant
:
me to perceive the power that is in them. Deem prayer as
the key to the insight of truth in scripture.
When thou desirest to approach unto God in thy heart, first
show Him love in bodily things. Here is the beginning of
discipline. For the heart greatly draws near to God by renun-
ciating some special necessary thing and by application to
labours. Even our Lord has laid here the foundation of per-
fection.
Account idleness the beginning of psychic darkness oral
;
intercourse as darkness beyond darkness and the latter as the
;
cause of the former. Even profitable words without measure
cause darkness. The soul is shaken by frequent intercourse
even if it is inclined and in a way near to the fear of God.
Deem darkness of the soul as being an agent unto confusion.
Darkness in the soul comes from disordered behaviour.
330 Measure and time in discipline illuminate the mind and
keep confusion afar. When the mind is upset by disorder, it
becomes dark. And when it has become dark, the soul is
troubled. Peace comes from order; light is born from peace in
the soul from peace, joyous air in the mind. According as
;
the heart approaches to wisdom, it receives the gladness which
is in God. The difference between spiritual wisdom and worldly

Profitable advice 22i
wisdom thou perceivest in thy soul. In the former, silence
reigns over thy soul ; in the latter, it will be a fountain of
distraction. When the former is present, thou wilt be greatly
filled with humility, and quiet and peace will reign over all
thy deliberations, thy limbs being quiet and at peace from
turbulence and trouble. When the latter is present, thou wilt
possess presumption in thy mind and varying unspeakable
thoughts and mental bluntness and thy senses will be turbulent
and impudent.
XLVI
OTHER CONSIDERATIOx\S
Do not think that a man who is tied to bodily things will
approach to freedom of speech in prayer before God.
An avaricious soul is destitute of wisdom and the one which
;
is compassionate, is made wise by the spirit.
As oil feeds the flame of the torch, so compassion feeds
knowledge in the soul.
The key of divine gifts unto the heart is given through love
of the neighbour.
331 According as the heart is freed from the bonds of the body,
to the same extent is opened before it the gate unto knowledge.
Deem the transition of the soul from world to world to
happen by the reception of insight.
Laudable and excellent is the love of the neighbour, but only
if the thought of it does not turn us from the love of God.
Delightful is intercourse with our spiritual brethren, but only
if it be possible that we preserve along with it intercourse with
our Lord. Beautiful, therefore, it is to trouble one self with
these, in so far as it is ordered by duty, namely in so far as
through it we do not fall short of the hidden service and con-
stant intercourse with God. To disturb divine intercourse, means
to erect human intercourse. The mind is not capacious enough
for both kinds of intercourse.
The sight of worldly people troubles the soul that once has
renunciated what is theirs, for the sake of the service of God.
To these belongs constant intercourse, to this even the avoi-
dance of sieht.

222 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Bodily labours are not impeded by impressions of the senses.
He that on the ground of mental peace wishes to embrace
gladness in hidden service will be disturbed in the quiet of his
heart, even by voices without sight.
Inner deadness cannot exist except by the annihilation of
the senses. Bodily discipline requires keenness of the senses;
psychic discipline keenness of the heart. As the soul is more
excellent in its nature than the body, so the service of the
soul is more excellent than the discipline of the body. And as
the body is anterior in existence to the soul, so are bodily
duties anterior to the service of the soul.
Great is the power of a little discipline, if it is combined
332 with constancy. The soft drop on account of its constancy
makes a hole even in hard rocks. When the spiritual man is
near to being quickened in thee, death to all things will come
to thee, and thy soul will become hot with gladness which has
no equal amongst created beings, and thy deliberations will be
concentrated within thee, on account of the sweetness in thy
heart. But when the world is quickened in thee, distraction of
mind will increase in thee, and lack of courage without con-
stancy.
World I call the affections conceived by distraction. When
they are born and have become fullgrovvn they become sin
and kill man. As men are not born without a mother, so
affections are not born without distraction of mind, nor does
sin become fullgrovvn without intercourse with the affections.
When patience increases in our soul, this is a sign thereof
that it has secretly received the gift of consolation. Stronger
is the power of patience than the emotions of gladness which
stir in the heart.
Life in God is the fall of the senses. When the heart lives,
the senses fall. The resurrection of the senses is the death of
the heart. When the senses are quickened this is a sign thereof
that the heart is dead regarding God.
The heart does not derive guidance from the virtues which
are performed among men. Virtues which a man shows unto
others, cannot purify the soul. Still they are taken into account
with God, in view of wages and reward. But that excellence
which a man performs unto himself, accomplishes the two : it
is taken into account for reward, and it causes purification.
Therefore desist from the former and cling to the latter. Without

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 2^3
application to the latter, to desist from the former means to
333 forsake God openly. The latter, however, fills also the place
of the former without its being performed.
Be dead in life in order that thou mayest be free through
thy being dead. Be dead to the world in order that thou
mayest be free from laws. For none of those who walk in
them can perfectly fulfill them in this life. Who is dead in his
life, is free while alive, and alive while dead.
Painstaking regarding graceful words is understood by sim-
plicity of heart coming from God.
The soul that perceives a life above bodily life, does not
adorn itself for the world. If man has not found the former,
he is scarcely able to despise the latter ; to despise it utterly
is absolutely impossible to him. And he that would try to do
so compulsorily, would stir up in himself a great struggle. But
if he has found the former kind of life, he can renunciate the
latter without a struggle.
Comfort and laziness are the destruction of souls. They are
able to harm even more than the demons. Where the soul
dwelling in light resides, in laudable labours of virtue, there
the demons are not able to work. But the soul which is dark
becomes thereby a guide even for the demons, so that they
can accomplish all kinds of evil things.
When a weak body is forced to accomplish too many labours,
it will accumulate darkness upon darkness in the soul and
conduct it more and more unto perturbation and obscurity. If
the dense body, namely that of sound constitution, comes to
laziness and takes its place in comfort, it accomplishes all kinds
of evil in the soul which dwells in it. Even if the soul greatly
rejoices in good, still, after a short time the body will bereave
it of thoughts that rejoice in the good.
334 When, however, the soul is drunk with gladness because of
its hope, and with the joy in God, the body will be without
apperception of troubles, even if it be brought low. For it will
bear a double load without becoming weary as is the case with
the body that has become heavy and the body will share in
;
the delight of the soul, even though it be brought low, when
the soul enters into spiritual gladness.
If thou guardest thy tongue, my brother, a gift will be given
to thee from God, affectibility of the heart so as to see thy-
self in it; and thereby thou wilt enter into spiritual gladness.

:
224 OfHfcfc CONSIDERATIONS
If, however, thy tongue vanquish thee, believe what I say
thou wilt never save thyself from darkness.
If thou possessest not a pure heart, have at least a pure
mouth. As the blessed John says: When thou wilt admonish
a man unto beautiful things, first draw him near to bodily rest
and honour him by a word full of love. There is nothing
which makes a man so modest and persuades him to inter-
change evil things with good ones, as bodily comfort and
honour which is shown to him by some one. The second
means of persuasion is a man's effort to be a laudable exam-
ple. He that has gained possession of his self by prayer and
watchfulness will easily draw his neighbour unto life, even
without wearying words and apperceptive admonition. Baseness,
on the contrary, and relaxation do not only harm those who
possess them, but also those who see them. As to the fact
that a man by bestowing care upon himself can spur his fel-
lows on to beautiful things and by the mere sight of him make
those who are relaxed ashamed, no words are sufficient to tell
335 how blessed such a man is. The silent deed has a greater
power to direct others than careful words which are contra-
dicted by laxity of behaviour. When however thou directest
thyself, thy neighbour will gain no small help.
The more a man enters into the struggle for the sake of
God, the more he will approach unto the heart's freedom of
speech in its prayer. And according as he is distracted by
many people is he bereaved of help.
The soul that has rest from the stings of the body, will
have peace in its emotions.
Be a free man as to the body, in order that thou mayest
be deemed worthy of spiritual freedom. Walk in the yoke of
thy freedom, lest thou be tied to the yoke of bondage to thy
enemies.
If once thou hast shown in thy person an example of dis-
solution from temporal life, then through abandonment of the
affairs of life thou wilt become wholly dead, as an example of
the future dissolution, as the care of all things will be taken
from thee by death. Be not angry at the blows of the body,
which death will wholly take from thee. Be not afraid ofdeath,
for God will elevate thee above it.

ON THE ANGELIC EMOTIONS STIRRING ETC.
XLVII
ON THE ANGELIC EMOTIONS STIRRING IN US BY
DIVINE PROVIDENCE EOR THE EDUCATION OF THE
SOUL IN SPIRITUAL THINGS
The first emotion that befalls a man by divine grace and
draws the soul towards life, strikes the heart [with thought]
336 concerning the transitory character of this1 ) nature. This thought
is naturally connected with contempt of the world. And then
begin all the beautiful emotions which educate unto life. That
divine power which accompanies man makes as it were a
foundation in him, which desires to reveal life in him. As to
this emotion which I mentioned, if a man does not extinguish
it by clinging to the things of this world and to idle inter-
course, and if he makes this emotion increase in his soul by
perpetual concentration and by gazing at himself, he will bring
himself near to that which no tongue is able to tell.
This thought is greatly hated by Satan and he strives with
all his power to eradicate it from man. And if he were able
to give him the kingdom of the whole earth in order to efface
by thought of it from his mind this deliberation, he would not
do otherwise. For Satan knows that if this recollection remains
with him, his mind will no longer stay in this world of error,
and his means will not reach man.
This sight is clad with fiery emotions and he that has caught
it will no longer contemplate the world nor remain with the body.
Verily, my beloved, if God should grant this veracious sight
unto the children of man for a short time, the course of the
world would stand still. It is a bond before which nature cannot
stand uprig — ht. And he unto whim this intercourse with his soul
is given verily, it is a gift from God, stronger than all
37 partial workings, which in this middle state are presented unto
those who with an upright heart desire repentance. It is es-
pecially given to him of whom God knows that he is worthy
of the real transition from this world unto profitable life, be-
cause He finds <iood will in him. It will increase and remain
1) earthly
Vcrli. AH. I.cUcrk. t 2-.' (Weiisin,*)

226 ON THK ANOEl.It' KMOTIONS STlRRrXO K'I'C.
with a man through his dwelling alone by himself. Let us ask
this gift in prayer; and for the sake of this gift let us make
long vigils. And as it is a gift without equal, let us keep
watch with tears at the gate of our Lord, that He may give
it us. Further we need not weary ourselves with the trouble
of this world. This is the beginning of the impulse of life,
which will fully bring about in a man the perfection of righ-
teousness.
O n the second working upon m a n. When a man
follows his discipline perfectly and when he has succeeded in
rising above the degree of repentance, and when he is near
to taste the contemplation of his service, when it is given him
from above to taste the delight of spiritual knowledge, a second
working, after the first, will take its origin here.
In the first place man is assured concerning God's care for
h — im and illuminated — concerning His love of the creatures
rational creatures and His manifold care for the things
which regard them. Then there arises in him that sweetness
of God and the flame of His love which burns in the heart
and kindles all the affections of body and of soul. And this
power he will perceive in all the species 1 of the creation and
)
all things which he meets. From time to time he will become
338 drunk by it as by wine; his limbs will relax, his mind will
stand still and his heart will follow God as a captive. And so
he will be, as I have said, like a man drunk by wine. And
according as his inner senses are strengthened, so this sight
will be strengthened and according as he is careful about dis-
cipline and watchfulness and applies himself to recitation and
prayer, so the power of sight will be founded and bound
in him.
In truth, my brethren, he that reaches this from time to
time, will not remember that he is clad with a bod}-, nor will
he know that he is in the world. This is the beginning of
spiritual sight in a man, and this is the principle of all intel-
lectual revelations. By this the intellect will be educated unto
hidden things and become mature , and by this he will be
gradually elevated unto other things which are higher than
human nature. In short, by this will be conducted unto man
all divine visions and spiritual revelations which the saints
1) lilt.: natures

ox Tin-: AXGKLrc kmottons stirrixc; ktc. --/
receive in this world. Thus nature can become acquainted with
the gift of revelations that happen in this life.
This is the root of our apperception in our Creator. Blessed
is he that has preserved this good seed when it fell in his
soul, and has made it to increase, without destroying it by
idle things and by the distraction of that which is transitory.
XLVIII
ON THE VARYING STATES OF LIGHT AND DARK-
339
NESS TO WHICH THE SOUL IS SUBJECT AT ALL
TIMES AND ON THE TRAINING IT ACQUIRES IN
THINGS OF THE RIGHT HAND AND OF THE LEFT
Let ns look at ourselves at the time of service and prayer.
If we possess contemplation regarding the words of the Psalms
and of prayer, this has its origin in real solitude.
Let us not be perturbed when we are in darkness ; espe-
cially if we are not the cause of it ourselves. For it is brought
about by divine care, for causes which are known only to it.
Our soul is then suffocated and, as it were, in the midst — of
storms. Whether a man approach unto a book of service
to whatever he approaches, it is darkness upon darkness which
he finds in it, so that he desists from all effort. How many
a time is he not even allowed to approach. He is wholly
unable to believe that a different state will come upon him so
that he will be in peace again. This hour is full of despair
and fear ; and the hope in God and the consolation of faith
are wholly effaced from the soul, which is totally filled with
doubt and fear.
Those who are tempted by the storm of this time, know by
experience the varying state which will follow after it. Never
will God leave the soul a whole day in this state ; otherwi — se
it would lose life and all Christian h — ope. But gradually
however strong this darkness may be a turn unto life will
appear from it. Unto thee, o man, I give the advice: if thou
possessest no power to dominate thy soul and to fall upon
34» thy face in prayer, envelop thy head in thy mantle and lie
down till the hour of darkness has passed away from thee.

228 ON TLIK VARYING STATICS OF LIGHT KTC.
Lsave not, however, thy cell. By this temptation are tried
especially those who are willing to walk in mental discipline
and who in their course are running toward the consolation
which comes from faith.
This dark hour, therefore, tortures them, more than by any
thing else, by spiritual doubt. It is also accompanied by strong
abuse sometimes even by doubt of the resurrection and other
;
points which it is not necessary to mention.
All these things we have experienced many times and re-
corded for the consolation of many. Those who are occupied
by bodily labours only are wholly removed from this struggle.
They are attacked by dejection with which every man is ac-
quainted and which differs from t — he state mentioned and — similar
ones. The healing of the latter viz. its consolation has
its origin in solitude. By intercourse a man will never obtain
the light of consolation, but in the course of time he will find
alleviation. Afterwards, however, it will attack him vehemently.
He needs an enlightened man, experienced in these things, by
whom he may be illuminated and encouraged from time to
time, though not constantly. Blessed is he that endures under
these circumstances the abiding indoors, he that after these
things reaches the large and strong apartment, as the Fathers
say. Not at once, however, will this struggle cease neither
;
will grace come and dwell in the soul completely at once, but
341 gradually. One, and the other: sometimes temptation, some-
times consolation. Some of it will remain, even till departure.
Complete deliverance from it we do not expect here, nor com-
plete consolation.
Thus has it pleased God that our temporal life should be
provided. And these things are for those that walk in the way.
XLIX
ON THE GLOOMY DARKNESS WHICH DURING
SOLITUDE BEFALLS THOSE WHO WALK IN
THE DISCIPLINE OF KNOWLEDGE
At the time of obscurity, more than any thing kneeling is
helpful. And even the fact that thou art not able to offer this
[unto GodJ and to cling to it, is [an act of war] on the part

ON TIIK (JLOOMV DARKNKSS WHICH DURING KTC. 220.
of Satan. It is thy duty to fight against this. For Satan knows
the help [provided] by kneeling; therefore he strives with his
whole power to withhold thee from offering it. And when thou
art near to falling on thy face, he will trouble thee. And even
if thou vanquishest him and bendest thy knees he will force
thee not to abide by
it.
Even if our emotions are cold and dark, we should perse-
vere in kneeling. Even if our heart be dead at these times;
even if we are destitute of prayer, so that we know not what
to say in that ev — en words of beseeching will not come to us,
nor supplication even then we should be found prostrated
constantly, even if in silence.
If we need any help from God, yet remain destitute of help,
342 we rightly do not obtain it, because we do not approach unto
God in prayer with zeal and fervour, night and day, crying
to Him in pain, because we expect that He will give it us
spontaneously. But He contrives an intermediate cause that
we should approach unto Him, by leaving us in trouble. And
by His refraining from delivering us, He produces our help in
that we prolong [our standing] at His door in prayer.
But we, when helpful things come to us, are stupefied and
hesitating and we deliver ourselves to despondency and aversion
and dejection, and we are colder than water. Under all evils
and temptations which befall thee, from without and from
within, the way of prayer lies before thee. Fall on thy face,
even if for a day and night only and beseech God with a
passionate heart. And God, who is merciful and good, will
not hesitate to give consolation and relief when He sees that
thou beseechest Him in the pain of thy heart, except thou
shouldst not ask in the [right] way.
During thy whole life thou hast to act thus. Thou wilt gain
and lose. And then thou shalt beseech in pain and He will
give thee. And again He will go away from thee-, and now
thou wilt meet with such a thing that thou wilt think that the
end of all has come. And when thou askest Him, in the next
hour it will have disappeared. Thus this course has been
ordained be not dejected.
;
During that time of deep darkness that lies upon the soul,
we have to be watchful against dejection. Listen to me, o my
brother, fight against [the inclination] to leave thy cell, as a
woman
343 in travail against her pains, and as a man who bears

2JO ON TDK GLOOMV DARKNKSS WHICH DURING K'I'C.
tortures. For the foe greatly purposes, more than anything, to
make thee leave thy cell, under the pretext of being unable
to endure, at the time of struggle. And with all his power
he will compel thee to go outdoors, lest, staying, thou shouldst
seek refuge with kneeling. Greatly, more than anything, is he
afraid of this act.
L
SHORT SECTIONS CONTAINING VARIOUS CONSIDE-
RATIONS IN WHICH IS SHOWN THK INJURY CAUSED
BY FOOLISH ZEAL UNDER THE PRETEXT OF FEAR
OF GOD AND THE PROFIT ORIGINATING IN QUIET-
NESS-, TOGETHER WITH OTHER SUBJECTS
A zealous man will never reach peace of mind. And he
that is destitute of peace is also destitute of gladness. Peace
of mind is called complete health, zeal is the contrary of
peace. He, therefore, that is moved by zeal suffers from a
severe illness. Before thou art deemed, o man, to move thy
zeal against the illness of others, thou has driven away health
from thyself. Thou hast rather to bestow care upon the healing
of thyself. If thou desirest however to heal the sick, know
that those who are sick, are in want of nursing more than
in want of vituperation. So, whilst thou cloest not help others,
thou vexest thyself by a severe illness. Zeal is not counted
344 among man as a form of wisdom, but as one of the illnesses
of the soul, namely a narrowmindedness and a great igno-
rance. The principle of divine wisdom is quietness acquired by
magnanimity, and the endurance of human weaknesses. Ye,
therefore, that are strong, bear the loads of the sick, and
direct the transgressor in a meek spirit. The Apostle counts
among the fruits of the Holy Spirit peace and patience l
).
A
heart full ofsuffering on account ofits insufficiency recardinir
manifest bodily labours, is the acme of all bodily labours.
Bodily labours, without mental suffering, are as a body
without a soul.
He that suffers in his heart and is lax regarding his senses,
1) Gal. 5,22

SHORT SKCTfONS CoXTAIXIXfi VARIOUS KTC. 2 }I
is as a sick man whose body is aching and whose mouth in-
dulges in all obnoxious kinds of food. He that suffers in his
heart and is lax regarding his senses, is as a man who has
an only son and slays him with his own hands limb by limb.
Suffering of the mind is an honourable gift from God ; and
he that bears it together with the duties it imposes, is as a
man who bears holiness in his limbs. A man who is dominated
by his tongue in all things, good and evil, is not deemed
worthy of this gift.
Repentance along with intercourse is as a pierced jar.
Blame along with a gift is a knife concealed in honey.
Chastity and intercourse with women are as a lioness and
a lamb in one house.
Labours and depravity before God are as a man who
slaughters a son before his father. He that is sick in his soul
345 and directs his comrades, is as a blind man that shows the way.
Compassion and justice in one soul are as a man adoring
God and idols in one house. Everywhere compassion is the
enemy of justice.
Justice is the equality of the even scale which gives to every
man as he deserves without deviation to any side and without
any consideration of a reward for it l ).
Compassion is an affection which is stirred by bounty and
which goes out to every one for their support. It does not
repay him that has deserved evil. To him that has deserved
good, it gives a double portion. If the former stands on the
side of righteousness, then the latter is on the side of evil. As
stubbles and fire cannot remain together in one room, so jus-
tice and compassion cannot in one soul.
As a grain of sand does not balance a load of gold, so the
effect of God's justice does not counterbalance His compassion.
As a handful of sand thrown into the ocean, so are the
sins of all flesh as compared with God's mind.
As a fountain that flows abundantly is not dammed by a
handful of earth so the mercy of the Creator is not vanquished
by the wickedness of the creatures.'
As one that sows in the sea and expects that he shall reap,
so is he that prays while preserving rancour.
As the flames of the fire cannot be checked from going
I) itself

232 SHORT SKCTIONS CONTAINING VARIOUS KTC.
upwards, so the prayers of the merciful cannot be checked
from ascending towards heaven.
546 As the violence of water in a narrow place, so is the force
of anger when it has found a place in our mind.
He that has humility in his heart, has become dead to the
world. He that is dead to the world, is dead to affections. To
him that is dead in his heart regarding his relatives, Satan is
dead. He that has found envy has also found him that found
it for the first time ] ).
There is a humility that has its origin in the fear of God
and there is a humility that arises through the love of God.
Some people are made humble by their fear, others by their
joy in Him. The former live with limbs subdued and ordered
senses and in perpetual contrition of heart ; the latter in full
exuberance and with an exulting heart which is never checked.
Love does not know bashfulness these, therefore, do not know
how to regulate or to order their limbs. Love naturally pos-
sesses frankness and oblivion of measure.
Blessed is he that has found Thee, thou harbour of all joys.
Beloved of God is the congregation of the humble, as the
congregation of the seraphs.
A chaste body is dearer to God than a pure offering. Both,
however, prepare a dwelling-place for the Trinity in the soul.
Walk with thy friends in a reserved attitude ; in doing so
thou wilt be of profit unto thyself and unto them. For usually
under the pretext of friendship the soul casts off the reins of
watchfulness.
Be cautious regarding intercourse ; it is not always profitable.
In the congregation honour silence; for it prevents many wrongs.
347 Be not so cautious regarding the belly, as regarding sight.
Inner war is in any respect easier.
Do not believe, o brother, that inner deliberations can be
regulated without the regulation of the body.
Fear customs rather than enemies. He that fosters a custom
is as one fostering fire. Both display their vigour when they
have acquired free play. When custom, however, has been
repelled the first time it demands access, thou wilt find it
weaker, a second time. But if thou fulfillest its desire the first
time, thou wilt find it stronger when it demands access unto
1) [ am not certain o( the sense of these words

SHORT SECTION'S COXTAINTXG VARIOUS I'.TC. 2^3
thee the second time. Under all circumstances* this recollection
will strengthen thee.
Help proceeding from watchfulness is better than help pro-
ceeding from labours.
Be not friends with one that loves laughter and derision
•,
for he will drag thee towards lax customs. Be not joyous with
him whose behaviour is lax; but be cautious against hating him.
If he desires to remain standing, try to help him and care
;
for his existence, until death. If thou art yet ill, thou hast not
to play the physician-, stretch the end of thy staff toward him,
and so on.
Speak with watchfulness before a boaster and one who is
sick with envy. For while thou speakest he gives in his heart
thy words the explanation he desires. He seizes the opportunity
to make others stumble, even through beautiful things in thee.
And thy words will be changed in his mind into opportunities
of illnesses.
348 Frown upon him that begins to speak to thee concerning
his brothers. Doing so thou wilt be found cautious by God and
by him.
If thou givest something to one who is poor, let gladness
of face and kind words and encouragement for his suffering
precede thy gift. When thou doest this, by thy gift the delight
of his mind will be greater than the want of his body.
On the day that thou openest thy mouth to speak against
a man, deem thy soul as dead to God and void of all thy
labours, even if it is thought that thou art moved to speak
by [the desire to] direct and to build. Wherefore should a man
demolish his own building and order that of his neighbour?
On the day that thou sufferest on behalf of a man in any
way, be it on behalf of the good or on behalf of the wicked,
in body or in mind, deem thyself on that day to be a martyr
and as one that has been deemed worthy of confessorship for
the sake of Christ. Remember that Christ died for the wicked,
according to the words of the scripture, not for the good.
Behold how great a thing it is to suffer for the evil and to
do good to the sinners, even greater than to do this for the
righteous. The Apostle reminds thee of this as of an amazing
thing.
If thou art able to acquire righteousness within thyself, be
not anxious to seek other righteousness.

234 SHORT SKC'iroNS CONTAINIXO VARIOUS KTC
Anterior to all thy deeds are chasteness of body and purity
of heart. Without them every deed is vain before God.
Any work which thou performest without deliberation and
—
examination know that thy labour upon it is vain even
349 though it be beautiful. God counts as righteousness every matter
of discrimination, not fortuitous performances.
—
A lamp in the su — n the righteous who is not wise.
Seed on a rock prayer of one harbouring rancour.
—
A
tree without fruits an ascetic without compassion.
—
A venemous arrow vituperation that has its origin in
envy.
—
A
hidden snare the praise of the cunning.
—
A
foolish counsellor a blind watchman.
—
Sorrow of heart — sitting with sinners.
A
sweet fountain — intercourse with the wise.
A
wise counsellor— a wall to rely upon.
A
foolish friend a treasure of deficiency.
Better it is to see a mourning assembly than to see a wise
man clinging to a fool.
Better it is to dwell with the beasts than to dwell with people
affected by envy.
Better it is to dwell in a grave than to dwell with people
who behave in a depraved way.
Sit with vultures but not with those who are covetous.
Associate with the murderer, but not with the quarrelsome.
Have intercourse with the swine, but not with the loquacious.
Better is the young of the swine than the mouth of the
loquacious.
Sit amidst lions, but not amidst the haughty.
Be the persecuted, not the persecutor.
Be the crucified, not the crucifyer.
Be treated unjustly rather than treat unjustly.
Be the oppressed, not the oppressor.
Be peaceful, not a zealot.
Deal beneficiently, not justly. Justice does not belong to the
behaviour of Christianity and no mention is made of it in
the doctrine of Christ.
Rejoice with those who rejoice, and weep with those who weep;
350 this is a sign of serenity. With the sick, be as if sick; with the
sinners practise mourning and with the converted rejoice.
Be a friend of all men, but a solitary in thy mind.

SHORT SECTION'S CONTAININi; VARIOUS KTC. 235
Join in the suffering- of all men, but hold thy body far
from all men.
Do not vituperate any one and do not direct any one, not
even those who are very evil in their behaviour.
Spread thy mantle over the sinner and cover him.
If thou art not able to take upon thee his transgressions
and to receive chastisement in his stead, at least suffer expo-
sure, in order not to expose him.
Do not quarrel for the sake of the belly.
Do not hate for the sake of honour.
Do not love to be a judge.
Thou must know, o my brother, that we stay indoors in
order not to know the evil deeds of men. For when we con-
sider all men as good, we shall reach purity in our mind.
But if we also become vituperators and chastisers and judges
and vindicators, persecutators and critics, in what respect then
is dwelling in the towns inferior to abiding in the desert?
If thou art not quiet in thy heart, be quiet with thy tongue.
If thou art not able to be a ruler of thy deliberations, be
a ruler of thy senses.
If thou art not a solitary in mind, be a solitary in body.
If thou art not able to labour with thy body, suffer in thy mind.
If thou art not able to watch on thy feet, watch on thy bed.
If thou hast no sufficient power to fast during the night, fast
at least in the evening. And if thou hast no force for fasting
351 in the evening, be on thy guard at least against satiety.
If thou art no saint in thy heart, be a saint in thy body.
If thou art no mourner ^ in thy heart, let at least thy face
be clad with mourning.
If thou art not able to justify thyself, then speak as a sinner.
If thou art not a peacemaker, be at least not a disturber.
If thou art not able to be valiant, be a humble man in
thy mind.
U
thou art not a victor, be not wrath with the vanquished.
If thou hast no sufficient power to shut the mouth of him
that speaks against his neighbour, guard at least thyself, lest
thou become his partner.
Know that if fire goes out from thee and kindles others,
the souls of all those to whom some of this fire has been im
1) abila, also a monk

236 SHORT SECTION'S CONTAINING VARIOUS KTC.
parted, will be demanded at thy hands. And if thou doest
not throw out fire, but doest agree with him that does, and
compliest with his deed, thou wilt be his partner in judgment.
If thou lovest peace, be peaceful. And if thou hast been
deemed worthy of peace, rejoice at all times. Pray for insight,
not for gold.
Be clad with humility, not with byssus. Acquire peace, not
a kingdom.
No one has insight without being humble. He that is not
humble, has no insight. No one is humble without having
peace ; he that has no peace is not humble either. No one
has peace without rejoicing. While men walk in all the ways
which there are in this world, they do not find peace, until
they approach unto hope in God. The heart does not acquire
peace from vexations and offences, until it approaches unto
this place. But hope will give them peace and pour gladness
352 into their heart. This is what that adorable mouth, full of holi-
ness, has said come unto me, all ye that labour and are
:
heavy laden and I will give you rest1 ). Draw near to the hope
which is in me, and desist from the many ways, and ye will
have rest from labours and from fear. Hope in God elevates
the heart. Fear of Hell breaks it.
The light of the mind gives birth to faith. Faith gives birth
to the consolation of hope. Hope makes the heart strong.
Faith is the revelation of insight. When the mind is dark,
faith is hidden, and fear reigns in us and cuts off our hope.
Faith through instruction does not free a man from presump-
tion and doubts; only that faith which dawns by insight. It is
called the revelation of truth.
As long as faith understands God as God, through the
revelation of insight, fear will not approach unto the heart.
When we are left in darkness and we lose this insight that
we may become humble, fear assails us which brings us near
to humility and repentance.
The son of God has borne the cross and sinners have ac-
quired courage in repentance.
If the habit of repentance has driven away the anger of the
King, he will not now reject your sincere mind. If the habit
of humility can drive away God's anger from him who knows
1) Matthew 11, 28

,
SHORT SUCTIONS CONTAINING VARIOUS ETC. 237
himself not to be true, how much more will this be the case
with you who are suffering' in truth for your trespasses. Suffi-
cient is the suffering of the mind in place of all bodily labours,
according to the word of the commentator 1
).
353 A temple of grace is he that is mingled with God by con-
stantly thinking of that which belongs to him. What is thinking
of that which belongs to him? It is the constant hunting after
his rest ; suffering at all times ; the toil of constant care con-
cerning those things which always remain imperfect on account
of the wretchedness of nature the constant sorrow at these
;
things which the mind bears under strong emotions and which
it places before itself with humble contrition as an offering
during prayer. As much as possible it despises the care of the
body, according to its power. Such is he that bears in his soul
the constant recollection of God, as the blessed Basil, the
bishop, says.
Prayer without distraction is that prayer which produces in
the soul the constant thought of God. For also this is God's
incarnation, that He dwells in us by our constant recollection
of Him with painstaking care of the heart, seeking His plea-
sure. Involuntary evil deliberations have their origin in pre-
vious laxity.
O men and brothers, ye that desire to give some rest to the
body in the way of recreation, for the sake of the service of
— God, in order to acquire force and to return to your service
let us not weaken our perfect watchfulness during the few
clays of rest, giving our whole self to relaxation as if we were
men who have not the intention to return unto their service.
Those who in the time of peace are wounded by arrows,
are the people who bear the cause of this in themselves
namely wilful freedom of speech. And the dirty clothes with
which they see themselves clad in a holy place (namely at the
354 time when God is astir in their soul) are those which they
have woven in the time of relaxation. The things which put
us to shame when, at the time of pure prayer, we wish to
offer them, are those with which we have accustomed ourselves
at the time when we esteemed our senses too low.
Watchfulness helps a man more than labours; and relaxation
injures him more than rest. In rest there arise internal wars
1) Theodore

238 SHORT SECTIONS CONTAINING VARIOUS KTC.
which a man is able to overcome vexing though they may be
to him. For as soon as he gives up rest and returns to the
place of labour, they are put to silence and flee from him. Not
so it is with that which is born from relaxation, though re-
laxation is born from rest. For as long as man is in the place
of his freedom, he is able to lay hand on himself and place
himself under the order of his laws he is still in the place of
;
his freedom. But when he is relaxed, he has left the place of
freedom. If a man does not throw away completely all his
watchfulness, he is not compelled against his will to comply
with those things which he does not like. And if he does not
completely give up the domain of his freedom, he will not be
assailed by accidents, which bind him so that he is not able
to withstand necessity. Do not give up the place of freedom
on account of any of thy senses, o man else thou willst not
;
be able to return thereto. Rest injures the novices only; re-
555 laxation also the perfect and the aged. Those who let them-
selves be directed to the comfort of bad deliberations, may
find the way back by watchfulness and gain the height of good
behaviour. But as for those who, confiding in their labours,
have neglected cautiousness, and have been captivated by the
relaxations of life, after [they had walked on| the height of
behaviour, some have been wounded in the country of the
enemies and have died during the time of peace, others have
set out for the sake of the merchandise of life, and have
exposed their soul to offence.
We have no difficulties when we trespass in a thing, but
only when we persevere in it. Trespasses will sometimes happen
even to the cautious.
But clinging to them is utter death. Suffering which we
endure for the sake of things in which we transgress fortui-
tously, are counted as pure service on our part, by the grace
that sustains our life.
Fie that sins a second time expecting [forgiveness] walks
with God cunningly. Unexpectedly the rope of punishment will
be thrown upon him and he will not reach the time for which
he had hoped.
If a man's senses are lax, his heart is also lax. The service
of the heart is a bond of the outward members, if a man
performs it with discrimination as the Fathers who were before
us. This is known from other tokens which are seen in him :

SHORT SKCTIONS CONTAININt VARIOUS KTC 239
;
namely that he is not entangled in bodily profits, that he does
356 not love money, and that he is wholly void of anger. Where
on the contrary these three are found the love of bodily
:
profits to a small or to a large extent, and quick anger, and
giving way to the belly (even in the case of the former saints),
know that the relaxation in outward things originates in inward
lack of patience, not in the baseness of the discriminating soul.
Mow
else could it be possible that such a one did not possess
disregard of bodily things, and quietness?
To expose oneself to disdain L ) discriminately is to be freed
from all things, to disregard life and to love men.
If thou endurcst willingly injuries for the sake of God, thou
art pure within.
If thou doest not despise any one on account of his stains,
thou art surely a free man.
If thou doest not run to encounter those who honour thee,
and if thou art not moved by meeting those who do not con-
cord with thee, thou art really dead to this life.
Watchfulness with discrimination is better than all kinds of
behaviour to all kinds of men.
Do not hate the sinner") ; we are all worthy of condemnation.
If thou art moved for the sake of God, weep over him. Why
shouldst thou hate him? Thou meanst to hate his sins? Pray
on his behalf, that thou mayest resemble Christ, who was not
angry with sinners but prayed on their behalf. Hast thou not
seen how He wept for Jerusalem ? In many things we are made
mock of by Satan. Why should we hate them that arc made
mock of like ourselves by the same one that makes mock of
Why
357 us: 1 hatest thou the sinner, o man? Perhaps because he
is not righteous as thou art? And how art thou righteous, that
hast no love? And if thou hast love, why doest thou not weep
for him, instead of persecuting him? It is through ignorance
that some people, reputed to be discriminating, are moved by
the deeds of sinners.
Be a herald of God's goodness, because fie provides for
thee who art not worthy of it. And though thou art guilty of
many things, it is not known that he is desirous of revenge.
And for the few things in which thou showest [good] will, he
remunerates thee with many. Do not call God just anymore,
1) rTOCVJ^iX. . Cf. Introduction 2) Willi lliis pas>;ige cf. p. 14, 79, 348, 350

24O SHORT SUCTIONS CONTAINING VARIOUS I'.TC.
for His justice is not known in His dealings with thee. Though
David called Him just and righteous, still His son has made
it clear to us that He is good and kind. For He is kind
towards the evil and the miscreant. How callest thou God just
when thou comest across the section on the hire of the work-
men ? Friend, I do thee no wrong. I will give unto this last,
even as unto thee. Or is thy eye evil because I am good 1)?
How can any one call God just if he come across the story
of the prodigal son? When he had spent all in fornication, it
was only on account of the contrition he showed that [the
father] ran to throw himself at his neck and made him lord
of all his possessions. No one else can say concerning Him
that he doubts His goodness. His son testifies this concerning
Him. How couW there be justice m God, when Christ died
•55s for us who were sinners? If He is compassionate here, we
believe that there will be no change in Him. Far be it from
us that we should wickedly think that God could not possibly
be compassionate. God's properties are not liable to variations
as those of mortals. It is not possr'6/e that lie sometimes
should not possess a thing, and afterwards should possess it,
or that what He possesses should diminish or increase as
that which creatures possess. But that which God possesses
is with Him from eternity, and it is with Him for ever, as
also the blessed commentator a says in his exposition on the
)
creation.
Fear before His love, not before the reputation of harshness
with which He has been charged. Love Him because it is our
duty to love Him not for those things which He will give,
;
but also because, of those which we have received. Even if He
had made this world only for our sake, who could sufficiently
tell His bounty? Where is the remuneration for Him in our
deeds? Who has persuaded Him beforehand to bring us into
existence? And who will intercede with Him for our sake when
we shall be in a state of oblivion as if we were not? Who
will stir our destruction into life? And from where will the
impulse of knowledge be cast into [what is] dust? O the wonder
of God's compassion. O the amazement of the bounty of our
Creator. O the power of His almightiness. O His immeasurable
kindness regarding our nature, that He also brings sinners into
—
1) Mnlt. 20, 13 15 2) Theodore

SHORT SECTIONS CONTAINING VARIOUS ETC. 2^1
existence ! Who can sufficiently tell His praise, who quickens
the sinner and abuser who had become dust without motion
[so as to participate of] a laudable, recognizing and rational
mode of existence that changes scattered dust into a being
;
exalted above perception that makes scattered senses a rational
;
nature with quick motion ? J[ the sinner is not able to [under-
stand] His quickening power, he can be content with His grace.
359 Where is Hell which can make us suffer? And what is the
torment which can overcome in us His fear, vanquish the joy
at His love? And what is Hell as compared with the grace
of resurrection, which will restore us to life after Sheol and
make this corruptible to be clad with incorruptibility, and make
rise in glory what was lying in the contempt of Sheol ? Ye
understanding, come and wonder. Who has an intellect wise
enough to wonder? Come and let us wonder at the grace of
our Creator. The retribution of the sinners is this, that He
repays them with resurrection instead of with justice. And
those that have trampled upon His laws are clad by Him with
the glory of perfection instead of with the body. This grace1
,
after we had sinned is greater than that which brought our
being *) into existence when we were not yet.
Glory to Thy immeasurable grace. Now the floods of Thy
grace make me silent without any emotion remaining, not even
thankfulness. With what mouth shall we thank Thee, good
king who lovest our life? Glory to Thee in both the worlds
which Thou hast created for our education and for our delight,
from all those that Thou hast brought into existence to know
Thy glory, now and at all times, world without end, Amen.
Vcrli. AM. L.!tli:rk. iy2z (Wensinck).

24-2 ON T[IK three degrees of knowledge etc.
LI
THE THREE DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE AND
3<->°ON
THE DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN THEIR SERVICE
AND IMPULSES AND ON THE FAITH OF THE SOUL
AND THE TREASURES OF MYSTERIES HIDDEN IN
IT AND TO WHAT EXTENT WORLDLY KNOWLEDGE
IN ITS MEANS 1 IS OPPOSED TO THE SIMPLICITY
)
OF FAITH
When the soul in the course of its behaviour walks in the
way of faith, this improves it much. When it then turns towards
the means of knowledge, it becomes alienated to faith at once.
And it is removed from that intelligible force of faith which
reveals itself by different acts of help in the serene soul that
simply, without inquiry, uses all that belongs to it.
The soul that has once, in faith, entrusted itself unto God
and, under many temptations, has received the taste of faith's
help, no longer thinks of itself, but is made speechless by ec-
stasy and silence, nor is it allowed to return unto the means
of its knowledge or to make use of them, lest it also be bereft,
on the contrary, of the divine care which visits it incessantly
and provides for it and clings to it everywhere. For the soul
would consider it as a despicable thought to deem itself suffi-
cient to guide itself by the power of its knowledge. For those
in whose hearts the light of faith has dawned, do not venture
to pray in their own behalf, they do not even venture to ask
361 God : Give us this, or : Take from us that, nor dare they
think of themselves in any way. For by the initiated eyes of
their faith they always see the paternal care which protects
them on the part of that leather whose strong and immeasu-
rable love surpasses the love of all fleshly fathers and who
has power to supply us with all things above what we ask
and think.
I7or knowledge is opposed to faith and faith with all its
means destroys the laws of knowledge. I do not mean spiritual
laws. For the circumscription of the domain of knowledge is
1) Klflo'ioA

ON THE THREE DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE ETC. 243
this, that a man is not allowed to do anything without inquiry
or examination; but he must investigate, so as to comply, if
possible, with what befalls him.
Dut as to faith, what is it? If yes and no approach unto it
equally, faith docs not consent to remain in that position. That
knowledge cannot be used without methods and means, that
it even does not exist without them, is known. And this is
the token of its sceptical attitude regarding truth. Faith on the
other hand requires a serene and simple mind, far from any
cunning or need of means. Behold, how knowledge and failh
are each other's opposites.
The mansion of faith is a childlike mind and a pure heart.
For in the purity of their heart people have praised God. For
'except ye be converted and become as little children' ') and
so on. Knowledge, however is the persecutor and opposite of
3f)2 these two. Knowledge adheres to the domain of nature, in all
its ways. Faith makes its course above nature. Knowledge does
not admit unto itself anything which is in disharmony with
nature, not even for the sake of trial • but it lets these things
dwell at a distance. Faith on the other hand orders with
authority and says Thou shall tread upon the serpent and
:
the lion the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample
:
under feet 2
).
Knowledge is accompanied by fear faith by trust. As
;
long as a man uses the means of knowledge, he is not free
from fear, it is not even possible that he be deemed worthy
of freedom. But as soon as he clings to faith, at once a free
man and the king of his sout and a son of God, he will use
freedom in all things, with authority. A man that has found
the keys of faith will use all the species in nature, as God.
For faith is allowed, even to create a new creation, just as
God did. If thou wiliest, anything will stand before thee. And
many times it is possible to make every thing out of nothing
Knowledge is not able to make anything without materials.
Knowledge does not venture to step over unto the domain
which lies outside nature. How then? That the dissolved nature
of water does not suffer the footsteps of flesh on its back,
that he who excites fire is burnt by it, and that it is dangerous
36 3 to act contrary to these [rules|. Such lore is cautiously guarded
1) Matth. 18,3 2) IV 91, 13

:
244 ON TlIE TIIRI':ji -DliGKKKS OK KNOWLEDGE ETC.
by knowledge. And it is absolutely impossible to persuade it
to order an advance into this domain.
Faith on the other hand commands this with authority,
saying : If thou tread on fire it will not burn thee ; and Hoods
•will not drag thee along. And faith has done these things
many times before the eyes of all creatures. If knowledge had
been given an opportunity in this domain, it would not have
given the permission to try such things at all. Through faith
many have entered the mouth of the flames, and have checked
the power of the burning fire, and have persevered in it with-
out injury, and have walked on the back of the sea as if it
were dry land. Verily, all these things are above nature and
contrary to the methods of knowledge.
Seest thou how faith shakes the foundations of knowledge
and shows that all its means and laws are vain; Seest thou
how knowledge guards the domain of nature? Seest thou also
how faith walks above nature and makes there the paths for
its course ? For nearly five thousand years the means of know-
ledge have been governing the world and the world has not
been able to lift its head from the earth at all nor to perceive
the power of its creator, until faith dawned to us and freed
us from the trouble of labouring upon earthly things and from
the vain slavery of fruitless distraction. And now that we have
364 found an unexplored ocean and an unlimited treasure, should
we desire to stay at a poor fountain? There is no knowledge
which is not lacking, rich though it may be. As to faith, hea-
ven and earth cannot contain its treasures.
He whose heart is supported by the trust of faith, will
never experience want ot anything. And though he does not
possess anything, he dominates all things through faith. As
it is written : All things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
believing, ye shall receive ').
And again : Our Ford is at hand ; be careful for nothing ~).
Knowledge perpetually seeks means to preserve those who pos-
sess it. What does faith do? 'Fxept the Ford build the house
and keep the city, they labour in vain that build it and wake
to watch'3 ). Never will he that seeks refuge with faith use means.
Knowledge everywhere praises fear. As also the sage says
Blessed is he whose heart fears. What does faith do? 'lie was
1) Matth. 21, 22 2) I'hil. 4, 4 sq. 3) cf. I's. 127, 1

ON THE THREE DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE ETC. 245
afraid and began to sink' '). And again : For ye have not
received the spirit of fear to bondage, but the spirit of adop-
tion -) to freedom in faith and trust in God. 'Fear them not
therefore'"), lest I crush thee before them. F"ear always accom-
panies doubt, and doubt examination, and investigation means,
and means knowledge. And that which always examines and
investigates, shows doubt and fear for knowledge does not
;
always and in every thing profit, as has been shown above.
365 Often hard circumstances and multifarious affairs oppose
themselves, full of danger and of such a nature that know-
ledge and the means of wisdom are absolutely unable to give
any profit; things which are so hard that they withstand the
whole power of the domain of human knowledge.
But faith is never' vanquished by anything. What help can
human knowledge afford in manifest struggles against invisible
natures and incorporeal powers and many things of that kind?
Thou seest how weak the power of knowledge and how
strong the power of faith is. Knowledge restrains its pupils
from approaching unto anything which can do harm to nature.
But look at the power of faith; what does it command its
sons? In my name shall they cast out devils and shall take
up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall
not hurt them *).
Knowledge according to its laws orders all those who walk
in its way, to investigate all things from their beginning till
their end and then to begin ; lest the end of the thing be
contrary to the limits of human power, and people might
undertake fruitless labour when their work would prove to be
impossible and difficult to be realized. But what says faith?
All things are possible to him that believeth r').
O unspeakable richness, o ocean rich in its billows and in
366 its amazing treasures, o effusions of the power of faith ! I low
full of encouragement, how delightful and full of trust is its
path! And how easy are its loads; how delightful is its
service. He li that has been deemed worthy of the taste of
)
faith and then turns towards psychic knowledge is equal to
him that has found a pearl of great price and changed it for
a copper coin for he has left authoritative freedom and has
1) Matth. 14, 30 2) cf. Rom. 8, 15
3) Matth. 10, 26 4) Mark 16,17
5) Mark 9,23 6) Introduction

;;
246 ON THE TIIRKK DEGREES OK KNOWLEDGE ETC.
turned towards the means of poverty which are full of the
fear of bondship.
Knowledge is not to be rejected, but faith is superior to it.
And if we reject, we do not reject knowledge, far be that
from us, but the distinctions in a variety of classes in which
it moves itself in opposition to the glory of nature, so that it
becomes cognate with the class of the demons. This we shall
discern distinctly, seeing in how many degrees knowledge moves,
and how many distinctions there are in every one of them,
and in which emotions it a rises within every one of the clas-
ses when it remains in them, and in which of these classes it
comes into opposition to faith when it is moved in them, and
leaves the domain of nature and which are the distinctions
;
of the service in them ; and in which class it comes to its
natural state, having changed its pristine direction preparing
the degrees for faith by its beautiful behaviour; and to which
point the distinctions of this class conduct it; and how it
3ft7 proceeds from this class to a higher one
;
and what are the
kinds of service in that latter class, which is the first in honour
and the point where knowledge is united to faith and becomes
one with it and is clad by its influence with fiery impulses so
that it blazes spiritually and acquires the wings of apathy and
is lifted up from the service of earthly things towards the
place of its creation, acquiring also other things.
So it is meet for us to know that the degree of the service
of faith is superior to that of knowledge. And knowledge is
made perfect by faith, so that it acquires the power to ascend
and to perceive that which is above all perceptibility and to
behold the splendour of Him that is not attained by the mind
or the knowledge of the creatures.
Thus knowledge is the ladder on which a man ascends the
height of faith, but which he docs not use any more when
he has reached faith. For now we know little out of much
and we understand little out of much. But when perfection
has come this little becomes useless.
So faith shows us as it were before our eyes the reality of
that future perfection. By faith we are instructed about those
unattainable things, not by investigation and the power of
knowledge. All works of righteousness: fasting, alms, vigils,
holiness and the others which are performed with the body
and neighbourly love, humility ofheart, forgiveness ofsins, medi-

;
ON TIIK T1IKKK DKGKKES OK KNOWUlIXU'; KTC. 247
tation upon beautiful things investigation of the mysteries
,
368 hidden in the holy scriptures, the occupation of the mind with
the practice of good works, the keeping of the affections of
the soul within the borders, and the other virtues which are
accomplished with the soul : all these need knowledge as their
regulating power. But all these are still degrees along which
the soul ascends unto the elevated height of faith, and they
are called virtues.
As to the discipline of faith, its service is above excellence
it is not a service of labour but one of perfect rest-, it is
consolation and comfort and it is accomplished by the im-
pulses of the soul. All the amazing distinctions of spiritual
discipline, the service of which is apperception of spiritual
forces and delight and exultation of the soul, and love and
joy in God and —all the other things which are granted through
this discipline all these are forthwith given by faith in full-
ness unto the soul which by grace is made worthy of this bles-
sedness, by God who is rich in gifts, as they are mysteriously
denoted in the holy scriptures.
But perhaps some one reasons thus : If all these good things
and the works of excellence which are mentioned above, and
also the refraining from evil and the discrimination of subtle
emotions arising in the soul, and the struggle with deliberation
and the strife against alluring affections, and the other quali-
ties without which faith— cannot even show its power in its
working upon the soul if all these are made perfect by
knowledge, how then can it be argued that knowledge is
in opposition to faith?
369 lhe solution of this doubt: There are three stages in which
knowledge ascends and descends in an intelligible way, and
where it receives its variations according to variations of the
places in which it moves, and where it also injures or helps.
The three stages which I mean are: body, soul, spirit. And
though knowledge is one in its nature, it becomes condensed
or subtilized in accordance with its abiding in these intelligible
places. And so also its stores are changed and also the working
of its impulses.
Hear now the [enumeration of] the stages of its service
and the causes by which it injures or helps. Knowledge is a
gift which was presented by God unto the species of rational
beings from the beginning of their existence. It is simple in

248 ON THE THREE DEGREES OK KNOWLEDGE ETC.
nature, not divided, as sunlight is, but has variations and
divisions in connection with its service.
The first stage of knowledge. When knowledge ac-
companies the love of the body, it gathers provisions as: riches,
vain glory, honour, elegant things, bodily comfort, means to
guard the body against those things which are in opposition
to nature, zeal for rational wisdom that serves to govern this
world, and to be the originator of inventions in crafts and
learning, and the other things which crown the body in this
visible world.
To the properties of this knowledge belong those which
have been enumerated above in opposition to faith. This know-
ledge is what is called simple knowledge, because it is bare
370 of every godly thought. It imparts to the mind an unspeak-
able weakness because it dominates it with a bridle and be-
cause its whole thought is directed upon this world. Thus this
degree of knowledge never imagines that there is at all an
intelligible force and a hidden governor regarding man, or a
divine care which provides for him. But it thinks that all good
which happens to a man, and his being saved from injury
and guarded against severe difficult accidents and against the
numerous adversities which inhere to our nature openly or
in secret, all happen by its own zeal and means.
This is the degree of knowledge which thinks in the way
mentioned and its adherents say that there is no providential
government in visible things. Consequently it is not able to
desist from constant anxiety and fear regarding bodily things.
Therefore [it is accompanied by] pusillanimity, grief, despond-
ency, fear of, demons, fear of men, rumours of robbers, tales
about epidemies anxiety before sicknesses, fear of scarcity of
food, fear of death, reptiles and beasts and other things of
this kind. And at all times of the day and night knowledge
is tossed about as the sea is by its billows, because it docs
not know to commit its care unto God with the trust of
faith in Him.
So knowledge in all its circumstances uses means and arti-
fices. And when by any cause its means are exhausted, be-
cause it does not see hidden providence, it scolds men as its
371 hindrances and haters.
By this knowledge was planted the tree of good and evil,
which is the eradicator of love. Knowledge examines the small

ON THE TOREK DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE ETC. 249
stains in others and the shortcomings and weak points of men
;
and in it are the disputations of learning-, and dialectics, and
cunning artifices, and all the other means which dishonour
man. In it are also presumption and haughtiness, because it
reckons to its own credit and not to God's credit all things
which happen, if they are wholesome.
Faith on the other hand attributes its deeds to grace.
Therefore it cannot be haughty. As it is written : I can do
all things through grace which strengthened me l ) ; and again :
Not I, but grace which was with me 3 ) ; and what the blessed
Apostle says: Knowledge puffeth up 3
).
This he says concerning that knowledge which is not mingled
with faith and trust in God, but not concerning true know-
ledge. Far be it! For true knowledge makes perfect by hu-
mility the souls of those who possess it, as Moses and David
and Isaiah and Peter and Paul and the other saints who were
deemed worthy of perfect knowledge, in accordance with the
domain of nature. And because their knowledge is constantly
enveloped by various visions and divine revelations and the
supreme sight of spiritual things and unspeakable mysteries,
their own person is in their eyes, as compared with these,
dust and ashes.
That other knowledge must needs be puffed up, because it
walks in darkness and it examines its subjects in analogy with
earthly things without knowing that there is something more
valuable.
372 But [even I those who are dominated by haughtiness because
their behaviour is |in their own eyes] of greater importance
than earthly and bodily things, and because they rely upon
service — without penetrating with their mind in unattainable
things when they come to meditate upon those waves of
the glorious splendour of the godhead, and their service is on
high, their mind then cannot deviate to think of impure things
and idle deliberations. For those who walk in light cannot go
astray. All those, therefore, who err from the light of the know-
ledge of God's son, and deviate from truth, walk in these ways.
This is the first stage of knowledge accompanying the bodily
love. This we reject, calling it oppositional not only to faith,
but to all works of excellence.
i) Cf. rhilippians 4. 13 2) Cf. I Cor. 15, 10 3) l Cor. 8, I

2^0 ON THE THREE DEGREES OK KNOWLEDGE ETC.
The second degree of knowledge. When knowledge
leaves this first state and turns towards meditation and psychic
love, it performs those beautiful things which have been des-
cribed above, through the cooperation of the psychic impulses
with the bodily senses, by its natural light namely fasting,
; :
prayer, compassion, recitation of the holy scriptures with a
view to excellence, strife against the affections, and so on. All
beautiful deeds and excellent distinctions which are seen in the
soul, and the amazing stages which are administered in the
church of Christ, are accomplished by the influence of the
;7j power of the Holy Ghost, in this middle stage of knowledge.
The Ghost will level ways in our heart leading to faith. And
by faith we shall gather provisions for this our true world.
And till this point knowledge is still of a bodily nature and
composite, though it occupies itself with excellence and though
it is the way conducting us to faith. For the latter is a degree
higher than knowledge ; and if knowledge is as it ought to be,
it will be able by the help of Christ, to ascend [this higher
way), when it bases its service upon seclusion from men and
recitation of the holy scriptures and prayer. And the other good
works will be made complete by these.
This is the second degree of knowledge, by which all beau-
tiful works are performed. It is called knowledge of practice,
because, as to its outward stage, it accomplishes its activity
by deeds perceptible by the senses of the body.
The third de g ree of knowledge, which is the
degree of perfection. How knowledge is subtilized and
acquires spirituality so that it resembles the discipline of those
invisible forces the service of which is not performed by the
apperceptive practice of works but by the thoughts of the
—
intellect hear this now. When knowledge elevates itself
above earthly things and above the thought of service and
begins to try its impulses in things hidden from eyesight, and
when it partly despises the recollection of [worldly] things from
which proceeds the perversion of the affections, and when it
stretches itself upwards and clings to faith by thinking of the
world to be and love of th — e promises and investigation con-
374 cerning the hidden things then faith swallows knowledge,
gives anew birth to it, wholly spiritual. Then it is able to
direct its flight towards non-bodily places and to the depths
of the unscrutable ocean of wonderful and divine government

ON THE TURK]-; DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE ETC. 25I
which directs intelligible and apperceptive beings, and to exa-
mine spiritual mysteries which are attained by the simple and
by the subtle intellect. Then the inner senses awake to spi-
ritual service, as the order of things which will be in the state
of immortality and incorruptibility. For from here onwards they
have received intelligible resurrection, symbolically, as a true
sign of that universal renewal.
These are the three degrees of knowledge, in which the
whole course of man is contained, that of body, soul and spirit.
From the time that a man begins to distinguish between o good
<r> t>
and evil, till he leaves the world, in these three degrees is
contained the knowledge of himself and the accomplishment of
all iniquity and wickedness and the summit of all righteousness;
and the scrutiny of the depths of all spiritual mysteries is
worked by one knowledge in these three degrees. Within these
is the whole emotion of the mind that ascends or descends
moving in good things or in evil things or between these.
These three degrees are called by the Fathers the natural, the
praeternatural and the supernatural. And these are the three
directions in which the thoughts of the rational soul ascend
and descend, as it has been said. Either it works righteousness
in nature, or in the domain above nature, its thoughts wrapped
575 up in contemplation towards God ; or it will go out to feed
the swine in the praeternatural domain, as one that has lost
the riches of his intellect while serving with the herd of demons.
The first degree of knowledge makes the soul cold to works
in the course of the good. The middle one excites in the soul
fervour in its course in the degrees of faith. The third stage
is the soul's desisting from service; and this is a symbol of
the future, that the soul only finds delight in intellectual occu-
pations, in the symbols of future goods. But as nature is not
yet elevated above the stage of mortality and above the load
of the flesh so as to abide totally in that spiritual state which
is exempt from deviation, and because it is not able to ad-
minister complete perfection in the world of mortality and to
abandon the nature of the flesh completely while it abides in
it as yet, therefore it is in the former and in the latter stage
alternately. Sometimes the soul in the middle degree of know-
ledge as a poor being is occupied with performing with all
its power the virtues proper to nature, because of the nature
of the body. And sometimes, as those who have received the

252 ON THE THREE DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE ETC.
spirit of adoption T ), it delights in the mysteries of freedom
through the gift of the spirit, even as it pleases its giver.
Then it turns again towards the poverty of its world, namely
of the body, being on its guard against it, lest the latter
should captivate it by the allurements which arc found in its
world through its troubled and easily deviating impulses. For
as long as the soul is covered by the curtain of the flesh, it
376 has no trust. For there is no perfect liberation in a non-
perfect world.
The whole service of knowledge is a service of work and
of exercise. The deeds of faith however, are not performed be-
labours for they are accomplished by the spiritual impulses
5
through the sole and pure efficacy of the soul [and they are
elevated] above the senses. Faith is more subtle than know-
ledge, just as knowledge is more subtle than apperceptible
deeds. For all the saints which have been deemed worthy of
spiritual discipline which is ecstasy in God, walk through the
power of faith, in the delight of that discipline which is
above nature.
I do not call this faith, that a man believes in the discri-
mination of the adorable hypostases of the F^ssence, or in the
properties of His nature or in the amazing government
,
regarding humanity consisting in His accepting our nature.
But I call this faith : the intelligible light which by grace
dawns in the soul and, without leaving room for doubt, sup-
ports the heart by the testimony of the mind, namely by the
persuasion of hope which is far from all presumptions and not
by tradition from hearsay. This light will show the spiritual
eyes of the soul the hidden mysteries which are in the soul,
and the secret riches of divinity which are concealed from the
eyes of fleshly men and are revealed spiritually to those who
at the table of Christ are brought up in meditation upon His
laws ; as He says : If ye keep my commandments, I shall send
you the Spirit, the Comforter, whom the world cannot receive,
}77 and He will guide you into all truth 2 ). Thus He will also
show man the holy power, which surrounds him at all times.
That power is the Comforter. By the power of this faith
all the parts of the soul are kindled as it were by fire so
that it despises all danger on account of its trust in God.
1) Romans 8,15 2) John 16, 13

ON THE THRKE DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE ETC. 253
And upon the wings of faith it is lifted up above the circle
of the visible world and, as drunk, it is constantly in ecstatic
thought of God. And by simple sight, and by insight without
sight of the divine nature, it accustoms the intellect to looking
at its secret being in meditation. For until the coming of that
which is the perfection of the mysteries, and until we shall
have been made worthy of its revelation eye to eye, faith
administers unspeakable mysteries between God and the saints.
May we be deemed worthy of them by the grace of Christ,
here by pledge, there in reality in the kingdom of heaven,
with all those who love Him. Amen.
LII
SHORT SECTIONS ON A DIFFERENT SUBJECT
ON THE DISTINCTION OF THE IMPULSES OF
KNOWLEDGE
When knowledge pursues visible things, concerning which
instruction is acquired through the senses, it is called natural.
When
it pursues the intelligible forces behind the visible things
in non-bodily species, it is called spiritual. For perception is
378 received by the spirit, not by the senses. And regarding both
of these kinds the soul receives the recognizable materials from
without.When however knowledge pursues the Essence it is called
supernatural, or rather agnostic, because it is elevated above
knowledge. As to this [latter kind], the soul does not acquire
contemplation concerning it in materials lying without it, as
is the case with the former kinds. But without materials, by
a sudden working of grace within, unexpectedly, it is revealed
in the soul. For the kingdom of God is within us ]). And it
will not come from the place from where it is expected, nor
through observation 2 ), according to the word of our Lord.
But within the hidden form of the intellect it is revealed with-
out cause and without meditation upon it. For the intellect
has no materials to meditate upon it.
Ihe first [kind of knowledge! is born from constant recitation
and from zeal for teachings. The second kind from a steady
1) cf. Luke 17.21 2) Luke 17,20

254 SHORT SUCTIONS ON A DIFFERENT SUBJECT ETC.
behaviour and faith of the intellect. The third kind is due
to faith alone. For there knowledge ceases and works reach
their end and senses will be superfluous.
As long as knowledge is beneath this line, it is called know-
ledge. And the lower it is, the more honoured it becomes, so
that when it reaches the earth and earthly things, knowledge
is master of all, and without it all is cripple and idle. But
when the soul elevates its gaze and directs the space and the
379 time of its impulses towards heavenly things and becomes
desirous after the things which are not to be seen with the
bodily eye and over which the flesh has no power, then all
things fall under the category of faith.
LIII
ON PRAYER AND THE OTHER THINGS WHICH ARE
NECESSARILY TO BE SOUGHT l IN CONSTANT RE-
)
COLLECTION AND WHICH IT IS VERY PROFITABLE
FOR A MAN TO RECITE WITH DISCRIMINATION AND
TO RETAIN
That a man have trust in the petition of his prayer through
trust in God, is the chief part of the gift of faith. The
assurance of faith in God is not a correct confession, though
this is the mother of faith, but a soul that looks on the
truth of God by the power of behaviour. When thou findest
faith and what is related to it, in the holy scriptures mingled
with behaviour, do not consider it in the sense of true con-
fession. Faith which gives the conviction of trust is never
demanded by the imperfect, or by those whose mind is per-
verted so that it cannot — attain truth. The assurance of truth
reveals itself in the soul in — accordance with the elevation
that is the result of behaviour in an attitude which tends
toward the legislation of our Lord.
The light of the soul consists in constant meditation upon
the scriptures. For they trace in the intellect profitable recol-
lections with regard to watchfulness against the affections and
for perpetual abiding with God, in love and in purity of prayer.
l) Hedjan's .\yiffli is a misprint for fj^aOA^a

ON I'RAYER AND THE OTHER THINGS ETC. 255
They trace before us the way which is made peaceful by
3S0 the steps of the saints. Yet do not confide in the signs of the
words when they are not accompanied by great alertness and
perpetual affectability through constant prayers. Accept without
doubt words that are spoken from experience, even if they
are uttered by a simple man. Even the great treasury of
earthly kings does not abhor to take increase from the money
of the mendicant. And from small sources the large streams of
the rivers increase.
If the recollection of the excellent renews in us the desire
of excellence when we commune with them mentally, the re-
collection of the impudent also renews in our mind impure
desire when we are reminded of them. This is because the
recollection of all these develops in our mind the distinct lines
of their deeds. And with their finger as it were they show us
their evil deeds or the elevation of their behaviour, in accord
with their belonging to o — ne or to the other kind. — And the
recollection with its stings be they right or left ones spurns
us to meditate upon the baseness of our mind (while the
images of their noble behaviour are depicted in our imagina-
tions) and to look upon them zealously.
So not only the meditation upon evil injures those who are
captured by it, but also the sight and the recollection of those
who perform evil. And not only is the performing of excellent
things greatly profitable to those who accomplish them, but
also the imaginative representation formed by the recollection
of the persons who perform those things. And on account of
5S1 this it can be understood that those who are near to reaching
the stage of purity, are deemed worthy of seeing perpetually
holy men in nightly visions. And during the whole day the
images of the saints which are printed in their soul are to
them a source of joy by their intellectual intercourse with them.
And on account of this they turn with renewed fervour towards
the performance of good works and an intense fire of love
unto excellence is kindled in them.
It is said that the holy angels assume the appearance of
honoured and excellent men and show themselves to the soul
in visions during sleep when the emotions are distracted, for
the sake of joy and higher incitement. And during the day
they set [the solitary] astir by the recollection of the visions,
and so they are fired anew to their labour by their joy at

256 ON PRAYER AND THE OTHER THINGS ETC.
those holy men. And so the latter are promoters of the former's
course. In the same way, at the time of the heat of battle,
those who are accustomed to evil intercourse, are visited by
the demons in this likeness. They assume a likeness in which
they show themselves to the soul, namely visions highly exciting
amidst the recollections of the day to those who converse with
these. Sometimes also they do this by frightful visions which
terrify the soul and weaken it, and which accentuate the dif-
ficulty of behaviour in solitude and reclusion, and the like.
We ought therefore, o my brethren, to use discrimination
regarding recollections, in our meditation, [choosing] which of
them we should cherish and which we should dispel hastily as
soon as they approach our mind, according to whether they
382 proceed from the activity of the demons who provide the af-
fections with matter, or from desire or anger, or from the
holy angels such as give indications that cause joy and know-
ledge and profit by the deliberations which they excite through
their offerings to us, or by the recollection and perception of
former deeds some of which stir in the soul deliberations that
are useful in any direction.
Experience concerning the two we must acquire by discri-
minating knowledge, as also experience concerning their aspect,
their intercourse, even concerning their way of working. Each
of the two has at once to be met with a distinct prayer.
Love which is maintained by [outward) things is to be com-
pared with a small flame whose light subsists by the sustenance
of oil and with a stream subsisting through rain, and whose
;
flow ceases as soon as the supply which maintains it becomes
deficient. Love of which God is the cause, is as a source
welling from the depth, whose current will never cease. For
Ile alone is the source of love whose supply does not fail.
Thou desirest to perform the recitation of Psalms during thy
service with delight, and thou wishest to perceive the spiritual
words which thou recitest? Abandon the performance of a
certain quantity and ignore the measures of service and say
;
the words in the way of prayer, and leave the usual iteration.
Understand what I say. As to those sections which bear the
character of a history, let thy spirit consider their repetition
as the recitation of some providential act of God, in order
that by the deep significance which is in them the soul be
383 awakened unto amazement at Providence ; and from here it

ON PitAVER AND THE OTHER THINGS' ETC'. 257
may be stirred to praises or to profitable affection. The pas-
sages which are prayers, take them unto thyself. When thy
mind has become established in them, confusion has given
way and disappeared. For in the service of bondage there is
no peace of mind, nor is there trouble of confusion in the
liberty of the children. For confusion is wont to suck away
the taste of insights and to rob them of their intellect, as the
leech which with the blood of the limbs sucks the vitality of
the body. For it is possible, to say of confusion that it is the
mount of Satan even. Satan, as a chariot-driver, is wont to
ride on it constantly, taking with him a multitude of affections.
Thus he invades the poor soul making use of the darkness
of its confusion.
And this thou hast to understand clearly, lest in the sentences
of thy recited Psalms and of thy prayer thou becomest a con-
ductor of words as if they came from a strange person. For
thou shouldst not think that thou art sedulously promoting
the work of the apostles if thou art wholly devoid of the pas-
sion and the joy which is in it. But thou shouldst say the
words beseechingly, as originating in thyself, with intelligence
and with passionate discrimination, as one who is aware of his
being occupied with ritual of his own. Dejection is caused by
distraction of mind ; distraction by neglect of labours and reci-
tation and by intercourse left to chance.
Not to use conversation with those who speak to us, but
384 to cut off their speech entreatingly, is a sign of a mind that
has found wisdom and power by grace. For its true know-
ledge frees it from much labour; and by its treading short
ways it cuts off the many windings of a long way. For we
have not at all times the power to reduce to silence all
contrary deliberations by arguments, and it may happen, when
we receive a blow, that for a long time we shall not be healed.
Against those who are six thousand years old thou wilt stand
thy trial. But they also are provided with means which may
destroy thee, being mightier than thy wisdom and thy learning.
But even if thou vanquishest, the dirt of their deliberations will
defile thy mind and their stinking odour will linger in thy
smell. But by the former method l ) thou wilt be free from all
these and from fear, because there is no helper like God.
1) viz. by cutting off discussions
Verb. Afd. Letterk. 1922 (Wensmckj.

25$ ONf PRAYER AND THE OTHER THINGS ETG.
Perpetual tears during prayer are a sign of divine mercy of
which the soul is worthy because of its repentance which has
been accepted ; and with tears it begins to enter the plain of
serenity. Unless the deliberations have been freed from the care
of transitory things and have cast away the hope of the world
and contempt for it has been established in them and they have
begun to prepare provisions for the day of a man's departure,
because the thought of — things beyond earthly ones has been
established l ) in the soul it is not possible that the eyes shed
385 tears. Tears originate from pure meditation without distraction
and from perpetual meditations without deviation, and by some
subtle recollection which falls into the mind and affects the
heart by the anxiety it causes. Then tears become frequent.
When thou turnest towards perpetual handiwork in thy soli-
tude, do not make the commandment of the fathers a pretext
for love of money. In order to avoid despondency thou must
have some trifling occupation which does not trouble the mind.
If however thou desirest to bestow more care upon it, for the
sake of alms, know then that the order of prayer is more
excellent than alms if thou desirest to do so because of thy
;
need, without being covetous, that which is sufficient to fulfill
thy want is what our Lord provides thee with. He never has
left His servants in want of transitory things. Seek ye first the
kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you, before ye ask, says our Lord 2
).
One of the saints 3 ) has said : it is not the aim of thy dis-
cipline that thou shouldst appease the hungry and that thy
cell chould become a place of congregation for strangers. For
this behaviour is rather meet for those who are in the world,
but nor for solitaries who are free from thoughts of visible
things and who preserve their mind by prayer. If ever thou
wilt be deemed worthy of the solitary state and avoid heavy
386 loads in the kingdom of its freedom, let not the customary
thought of fear terrify thee with its many and varying delibe-
rations. But as a man who believes that there is a guardian
with him and who knows occurately through his wisdom that
he and all creatures are under one Lord, and that one will
moves them all and stops and governs them, and that no
fellow is able to injure his comrade without the commandment
1) Reading ^\\.1."V3 2) Matthew 6,33
3) I'erliaps Eiiagrius; cf. Rook of the Dove^ p. 30

OK PRAYER AND THE OfHER THINGS ETC. 259
—
of the Governor, and that all is under His care make up
thy mind to be courageous. For though some of them have
been given freedom, yet they have no freedom in all things,
and neither the demons nor the beasts of prey, nor malicious
men are able to injure any man according to their good plea-
sure, until the divine will has given the command and until
material opportunity has been given. .It is not granted by the
divine will that all freedom should realize itself, otherwise no
flesh could live. For the Lord does not allow the freedom of
demons or man to approach his creatures that they use it
according to their good pleasure.
So thou hast to say to thyself: there is a guardian with me
and there is no possibility for any of the creatures even to
show themselves to me, if no permission from on high has
been given. So if thou seest with thy eyes and hearest with
thy ears their threatenings, even then thou must not believe
that they will venture to act. If they had received an order
387 from the heavenly will, no speech and even not a word even
would be necessary, but action would immediately follow will.
And if this be the will of my Lord (so say to thyself), that
the evil ones have power in his creation, then I must not
resist this fact as if I were one taking pleasure in contradicting
the will of his Lord. Thus, even in thy temptations, thou shalt
be full of gladness, as one who knows and feels that his Lord
is governor. Support therefore thy heart by confidence in the
faith in the Lord without being afraid for the terror by night
nor for the arrow that flies by day x ). For the faith of the
righteous in God makes the beasts of the field as lambs and
goats3 ). It is namely impossible to be a righteous man confiding
in God unless this be true of thee, that for the sake of the
service of righteousness thou art gone into the desert with its
many troubles and that for it thou art administering- the will
of God. So thou labourest in vain when thou takest upon thee
these pains. For God does not wish the pains of mankind, but
that thou offer to Him as a sacrifice of love thy personal
affections. All those who love God show Him this distinctive
[sign of love] that they are willing to bear troubles for the
sake of His love. For all those who desire to live in the fear
of God through Jesus Christ, bear troubles. And then He
makes them rule over his hidden treasures.
1) I'salm 91, 5 2) Cf. Book of the Dov,; p. 80

:
26o ON PRAYER AJSfD tflE OtllER THINGS ETC.
One of the saints has said There was an old, honoured
:
solitary to whom I once went when I was shaken by tempta-
388 tions. He was ill and had to lie down. When I had greeted
him I sat down near him and said : Pray for me, Father, for
I am very much shaken by the temptations of the demons.
He opened his eyes and looked at me benignanthy, saying.
My son, thou art a boy God will not admit the demons
;
unto thee. I answered : If I am a boy I have to bear the
temptations of strong men. Then he said to me : So God is
trying to make thee wise. I said to him : How can I become
wise, if I taste death every day? He said to me: God loves
thee be silent, God shall give thee His gift. Then he said
•,
to me : Thou must know, my son, that I have been making
war upon the demons during thirty years, of which I have
passed twenty without enjoying any help whatever. When
twenty five years had elapsed, rest began to show itself. As
it approached, it increased and when twenty eight years had
passed it had grown considerably. And now that thirty years
have been accomplished rest has increased to such a degree,
—
that I know not how this can happen. Further he said
When I desire to stand performing service, I am allowed to
accomplish one marmita Y ). Further, even if I remain standing
during three days — , I am in ecstasy with God, without per-
ceiving fatigue. Behold how prolonged labours produce
illimitable rest.
One of the Fathers used to eat two times every week. He
389 said to us : 'The day on which I speak with someone, I am
not able to keep the usual rule of fasting, but I am compelled
to break it'. So we understand that the keeping of the tongue
not only does excite the mind unto God but that it also in
secret grants considerable force for the accomplishment of the
visible labours which are performed through the body. And
on account of a hidden service the intellect will constantly be
illuminated, as our Fathers say. For keeping the tongue excites
the heart unto God, if we be silent with knowledge.
This saint was much given to vigils saying When of a
:
nioght I stand till dawn and take rest after the recitation of
Psalms, and then wake up from sleep, on that day I am as
a man who is not in this world. No single earthly thought
1) a fifteenth part of the psalter.

:
ON PRAYER AND TIIK OTIfKR THINGS ETC. 26 I
rises in my heart, nor do I want definite regulations, but all
day I am in ecstasy.
On one day such as this in which I was wont to take food
(and since four days I had not eaten), when I rose in order to
perform the evening service and to eat afterwards, I stood in
the room of my cell in full sunlight. I perceived only that I
began with the marmita which is the beginning of the ser-
vice ; but till the next day when the sun rose before me and
the clothes on my body became warm, I did not perceive
where I was. As the sun troubled me by burning my face
my mind came back to me and behold, I saw that it was a
390 new day. And I thanked God because of His pouring out
His grace upon mankind and because of His deeming worthy
of such a greatness those who seek Him.
Here end the tales of holy men.
LIV
OTHER EXPLANATIONS CONCERNING
MAGGENANUTHA
J
)
Although we have already spoken on this subject in an
other context in the foregoing disquisitions 2 ), when an oppor-
tunity offered itself, yet we do not object to elucidating the
subject further here.
Maggenanutha denotes help and guardianship and also the
receiving of the heavenly gift. As for instance: The Holy
Ghost shall come and the Power of the Highest shall over-
shadow thee 3 And: Thy right hand shall save me '% which
).
is a prayer for help. And: I will defend this city to save it5 ).
So we understand two kinds of action in the maggenanutha
granted by God unto mankind one is symbolical and intel-
ligible ; the other practical. The former is connected with the
holiness which is received through divine grace ; this means
by the influence of the Holy Ghost a man is made holy in
body and soul, as is the case of Elisha and John and Mary
the blessed among women. But because this is incomparable
1) Inspiration, revelation, incarnation a.s.o. 2) Syriac text, pp. 107, 160
3) Luke 1, 35 naggen\ to overshadow is only a faint rendering. The original means
rather to envelop and toA overpower.
4) I's. 138,7 5) 37,35

262 OTHER EXPLANATIONS CONCERNING MAGGENANUTHA
and above that which happens to the rank-and-file of creatures
we have to come to that partial [holiness] which is granted
unto the other saints, in the relation between the limbs and
the body. —
The mysterious kind of maggen — anutha as the [gifts]
391 imparted unto each of the saints is a kind of influence
which possesses the mind. And when man is deemed worthy
of this maggenanutha, the mind is snatched away in ecstasy
and expanded by some divine revelation. And as long as the
influence possesses the mind, man is exalted above the emo-
tions of psychic deliberations, on account of his communion
with the Holy Ghost.
And this is what was said by the Apostle in the form of
a prayer unto the Ephesians, when he desired to explain to
them this mystery : May the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of glory, give unto you the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of Him : the eyes of your hearts
beinc enlightened x ). What is the result of this? That ye may
know what is the hope of His calling and what the riches of
the trlory of His inheritance in the saints, and what is the
exceeding greatness of His power to us-\vard who believe 3
).
This is one symbolical kind of maggenanutha, that when
this power overshadows a man, he is deemed worthy of the
o-lory of the new world, by revelation. And this is the part
that has fallen to the lot of the saints by light concerning
;
which the blessed Paul says, that those are deemed worthy
of it who have received sanctification of the mind from the
Spirit, on account of their holy and excellent behaviour 3 ).
Another kind of maggenanutha is that whose action mani-
fests itself practically. It is the intelligible power which con-
stantly covers a man and broods over him, removing from him
any injury or accident that threatens to approach his body or
soul something not to be perceived visibly by the mind, but
392 clear and evident to the eye of faith, such as was frequently
experienced by the saints ; as is written : The angels of the
Lord encamp round about them that fear Him and deliver
them And Many are the afflictions of the righteous but
'*). : ;
the Lord delivers them out of them all r>).
1) Ephesians 1,17 sq- 2) ib. 10, iS sq. 3) cf. 2 Thess. 2,13
4) Ps. 34,7 5) l's- 34,19

HOW THE HIDDEN ALERTNESS WITHIN THE SOUL ETC. 2(r
LV
HOW THE HIDDEN ALERTNESS WITHIN THE SOUL
IS TO BE PRESERVED HOW SLEEPINESS AND COLD-
NESS ENTER THE MIND BANISHING THE HOLY
FERVOUR FROM THE SOUL KILLING THE DESIRE
OF GOD THAT TENDS TOWARDS SPIRITUAL AND
HEAVENLY DESIRABLE THINGS
Opposition would have no chance to cause confusion to
those who desire beautiful things, if an occasion were not
offered to these evil machinations by the lovers of beautiful
things themselves. The matter is nearly thus.
Every impulse of love unto what is beautiful is from the
beginning of its motion accompanied by some zeal which in
its fervour resembles that of fiery coals. This zeal usually sur-
rounds the impulse of love as a wall, chasing from its neigh-
bourhood all opposition and trouble. It possesses such vigour
and unspeakable force that it can stiffen the whole soul against
relaxation or against being shaken by the attack of all troublous
things. It is in the first place the force of the holy desire im-
planted in the nature of the soul, namely an emotion set astir
393 by the force of the soul's natural anger, which is implanted in
it by God in order to guard the boundaries of nature, so that
it may use its vigour for fulfilling the natural desire of the
soul, which is excellence. It is impossible to perform excellence
without this impulse.
It is called zeal because it makes zealous and it sets astir
and kindles and makes man heroic from time to time so that
he despises the body in the troubles and terrible temptations
which occur, and delivers his soul to death full of confidence
and encounters the powers of the rebellion, giving up espe-
cially the fulfilling of what the soul loves.
A
certain man, clad with Christ, somewhere in his book calls
this zeal a dog and a guardian of the law of God, which is
excellence.
Excellence is the fulfilling of the laws of God. This force of
zeal becomes mighty and alert and fervent for the sake of
guarding the house, an account of two reasons ; and it becomes

264 HOW THK HIDDliN ALERTNESS WITHIN THE SOUL ETC.
weak and sleepy and despicable on account of other two reasons.
The first reason of fervour and alertness consists in anxiety
for the virtues which a man possesses or is going to possess,
when some fear arises, lest these virtues should be stolen or
seized by some approaching event. This fear is set astir by
divine care, in all worshipers of excellence, lest the alertness
and the constant zeal of the soul should get asleep.
When this fear is set astir in nature, the dog of which we
394 have spoken will be fervent, night and day, as a blazing fur-
nace, spurring nature which like a Cherub is watching and
threatening all the surroundings at all times. If, so to speak,
a bird should pass by, it would be astir and bark with a
vigour unspeakably sharp.
When this fear is anxious on behalf of the body, it is Sa-
tanic because faith in God's care is shaken and man forgets
;
how God thinks of those who care for excellence by caring
for them at all times. As the Holy Ghost has said through
the mouth of the prophet The eyes of the Lord are upon
:
the righteous and His ears are [inclinedj to hear them l ). For
the thoughts of the Lord are unto those who fear Him. And
in another place [the prophet] says, as it were speaking in the
name of God, unto those who perform righteousness There
:
shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh
thy dwelling. For He shall give His angels charge over thee
to keep thee; they shall bear thee up in their hands 2 ), and
compare the other words of Scripture.
But when this fear is on behalf of the soul, for the accidents
threatening excellence, namely fear lest the soul be robbed or
injured by any cause, this is a divine impulse and an excellent
thought. And it is in God's care that this distress and fear
originate, and this terror which torments the mind by its op-
pression.
The second cause of the vigour and the fervour of the dog
is brought about by the increase of love of excellence in the
soul. According to the measure of the — love of the soul for
395 that which —it possesses by this love, which is a divine
deliberation this natural zeal glows for it.
As to the causes of its abating and sleepiness, one of them
is brought about by love being quenched and reduced in the
l) Psalms 34, 16 2) Psalms 91,11 sq.

IIOW THE HIDDEN ALERTNESS WITHIN THE SOUL ETC. 265
soul. The second rises when some deliberation of trust takes
its seat in the soul and man confides and thinks many
times that there is no danger of anything that could injure
him. Then he casts away the weapon of zeal and becomes as
a house without a guardian. And the dog goes asleep, leaving
his watch. Usually this deliberation is the source of most of
the intelligible houses being robbed. This happens when the
serene flame of holy knowledge in the soul becomes dark.
Whereby does it become dark, if not by some subtle deli-
beration of presumption penetrating into the soul, or because
man is given to too much care of bodily things, or because he
is frequently in contact with worldly things. Every time that
strugglers come into contact with lay people, especially women,
the soul descends. This also happens through contact with the
multitude on account of whose gaze the soul necessarily is
assailed by vain glory.
In short: the ruling mind as often as it comes into contact
with the world resembles the skipper who calmly was sailing
on the sea while a soft wind from behind drove him towards
the harbour, when he suddenly got among the cliffs.
LVI
BEAUTIFUL CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING THE
396 ')
LIFE OF MAN
As often as man in his course approaches this world, the
love of worldly things takes root in him, and he is constantly
troubled by the thought of them, and he fights with man for
them and becomes bound in love to some person or other,
;
without discrimination.
When on the other hand the mind profits by the subtle
meditation upon the world to be, constantly thoughts unrivalled
will move in it; and expecting the things which he does not
see, he goes to meet them, forgetting the things of this world,
sometimes forgetting himself, because of his utter absorption
in ideas, neglecting visible things on account of these delibe-
rations. So deliberations as well as practice are despised by
1) literally: distinctions

266 1SEAUTIEUL CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING ETC.
him as long as he cares for these ideas. lie is devoid of
enslaving love related to single persons, but universal love
which does not need sight is fixed in his soul. The appercep-
tion of recollection concerning human things gradually disap-
pears from his mind, while the thought of hidden tilings in-
creases in it, gains force and vanquishes bodily deliberations,
till it is free from corruptible things, as far as nature allows
this. And if it were not that the common [humanj recollection
was aroused in him, when the need of something which cannot
absolutely be dispensed with presents itself, his mind would be
directed towards future things the most of the time, by such
thoughts as would give him profit of these things. And be-
cause of these he becomes a stranger 2 ) to all the wisdom of
this world. So he becomes void of recollection and a fool as
it were on account of his having examined human wisdom.
397 Blessed is the man who has been deemed worthy of these
things. Tears will not cease to drop from his eyes when he
turns unto himself with the recollection of those things by
which men are led into error, and why forgiveness is granted
them, and whereby the universal end is brought about, and
what labour and error is caused by these. It is said concerning
Paul that on account of these emotions which prevailed over
his soul, for three years he was not quit of tears, unable to
subdue them.
Such a deliberation accompanied with the emotion of tears
rules man when he perceives the future hope and then turns
his mind towards the things of this world, [thinking] how small
psychic life is in comparison with the hope preserved for eter-
nities, in the new life. By such affectability man grows dead
unto all transitory things and thought of them ; and all affec-
tions of body and soul die in him.
Let us remember this, my beloved, and despise the things
of this world, as much as it is possible for us ; and let us
gradually, to the same extent, approach with our emotions
towards future things. For if a man does not compel himself,
from time to time utterly neglecting the things which are
before the eyes in order to abandon them gradually and to
proceed onwards in this way, so that the — thought and the
contemplation of these things increase in him he will remain
i) literally: a foul

BEAUTIFUL CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING ETC. 267
in this body with his behaviour. Also those who walk in the
way, if they do not go forwards in their daily march and so
diminish the distance but remain on one spot, the way before
398 them will never end and they will never arrive there where
they hope to come.
Our case resembles theirs. If we do not compel ourselves
gradually, we never shall have the power to abandon the
bodily things in order to look towards God.
Because it is so difficult to free oneself from them when
one has once become entangled in any of them, it is a matter
of wisdom to struggle in order not to come near to them, so
that one may be free even of the thought of them, and thus
the mind be able to look towards something different. I do
not mean that we should not provide for our wants ; for these
are a necessity and may bereave nature of life. But we should
not put them in the position of the principal service by giving
them the preference over the service of God. But attending
to these needs in part, we must leave the care of them to
God. We should confide in Him rather than in ourselves.
And when a man ventures to despise these [earthly] things
wholly for the sake of spiritual things, I do not esteem this
improper, because we have all the encouragements of scripture
that teaches us to be strong in hope ; as is written : The Lord
is at hand; be careful for nothing 1). And David says: Cast
thy care upon the Lord and He shall sustain thee 2 ). The rich
do lack and suffer hunger but they that seek the Lord shall
:
not want any good thing 3 And our Lord has commanded
).
us, saying Be careful for nothing, but frequently think of the
:
future things. And these earthly things which are necessary
because of the needs of nature, will not fail thee.
399 May God in His grace grant us that His love be abundant
in us, in order that by constant meditation on Him we may
forget the world and what belongs to it by becoming free
from its bonds ; and that instead of many bonds we may be
bound with that one bond which is not loosened from those
who love Him, namely the bond of the kingdom of the worlds
above ; that wre also may be bound with it, and be deemed
worthy of the prefiguration of good the fulness of which is
preserved in the future world for those who have possessed
1) Philippians 4,5 2) Psalms 55,22 3) Ps. 34, 10 according to the Peshito

268 BEAUTIFUL CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING ETC.
it here already. That we also may possess it and be pos-
sessed by it through the power that comes from it, for ever
and ever, Amen.
LVII
HOW
PATIENCE FOR THE SAKE OF THE LOVE OF
GOD ACQUIRES HELP FROM GOD
In accordance with a man's despising this world and his
being occupied by the fear of God, divine care will approach
him and he will perceive its help in secret and there will be
given to him clear emotions so as to understand it. Even
though a man be not destitute of the goods of this world by
his own will, still even as he is devoid of them, so mercy
will follow him and divine compassion will support him. Glory
to Him who shows us His grace in things of the right and
of the left hand J ) and who in all of them lays a cause for
the renewal of our life; and who makes the souls of those
who, wilfully, are too weak to acquire life, ascend towards
excellence, by involuntary distress.
4oo The poor Lazarus was not destitute of the goods of this
world by his own will, even his body was stricken by ulcers
•,
bitter plagues he had to endure, one still harder than the
other : illness and poverty. Yet in the end he received honour
in the bosom of the patriarch.
God is near to the suffering heart which out of trouble
cries to Him. And though the body sometimes refuses to
bear these pains for the sake of the help, yet, as a physician
who causes healing by the acute pains of his operations, the
Lord greatly favours his soul in accordance with the heavy
pains of his distress. Now when the love of Christ is not so
prevalent in thee that thou art without affection in all troubles
through thy gladness in Him, know then that the world lives
in thee more than Christ does. When illnesses and want, or
injury of the body, or fear of its afflictions trouble thy mind
in the joy of thy hope and thy clear thought in our Lord,
know then that the body lives in thee, not Christ. He whose
1) happy and unhappy

HOW PATIEtfCfc FOR THE SAKE OF THE LOVE ETC. 269
love is prevalent over thee, he lives in thee. If thou art able
to walk in serenity on thy way unto Christ, fulfilling all things
required without lack, without bodily torments, without fear
of adversaries, know then that thou art sick in thy mind and
devoid of the taste of God's glory.
I do not judge why thou art so, but [I say this] in order
that thou mayest know at least how far thou art from the
401 accomplishment, even partially, of the discipline of the saints
which lived before us. Do not say: There is not a man to
be found whose mind, shipwrecked though the body may be
by every sorrow of temptation, is so wholly exalted above
sickness that the love of Christ vanquished the affectability
of the mind. I refrain from reminding thee of the deeds of the
martyrs perhaps we would be unable to remain standing firm
;
before the deluge of their sufferings, in which patience through
the power of love has vanquished the trouble and the love
of the body. But because even the recollection of these things
is difficult to human nature, in that we are troubled by the
greatness of the thing and by its amazing aspect, we will
turn towards the ungodly philosophers, and from them, by a
comparison with their patience, we shall find instruction con-
cerning the weakness of our will. But this has also to be
preserved till its time when we shall explain it in its place 1 ),
knowing that also this is a sign of illness. Thus we shall not
judge this matter from ourselves, but so that we may believe
how very low we have been cast down and how that, despite
this, it is possible that the Highest should become wholly man.
The drunkard will never believe that there are many men
who do not even drink wine. Neither will the lascivious be-
lieve, that there are men who wholly abstain from sexual
union. Neither will he that is troubled by a certain desire
believe that there are men who are not troubled at all by
this desire, even though they be incited by other things.
Neither will he that is constantly ill, believe that there exists
a body which is not ruined by illnesses. So the consolation
402 of those who are not able to vanquish absolutely [the weak-
ness of| the mind, may be in the consideration that there is
no man who is completely elevated above this weakness. That
there are people in whom the love of Christ has vanquished
') P- 4°3 (Syriau text)

27O ItOW PATIENCE EOR THE SAKE OF THE LOVE ETC.
the weakness of nature so that they wholly despise the body
and its love, whose mind is not troubled by the gladness in
Christ so that this should bring about the possibility of being
vanquished by the power of oppositional forces on the part
of the body, and in whom —the [divine] gifts have overcome
the incompetence of nature this they do not believe at all.
I do not say that difficulties wholly fail in the way of God,
or that there is anyone who lives in this way without tempta-
tions. On the contrary, I say that he that lives in excellence,
day by day will find more troubles, and the farther he proceeds
onwards, the more he is oppressed by distresses. This is a
sign of the veraciousness of his course, that he lives a bitter
life in this world and that he departs this body with torments.
For this world is not the world of the righteous, and they
cannot abide in it without distresses. But the will can be
strengthened by grace to despise all these things and keep the
mind without confusion, by the gladness of the love of Christ.
That there have been men who reached this, and that it
is possible that they become thus even now, is due to the
great help of the gift of Christ. Do not judge, o man, the
403 deeds of all men, from thy own case, and do not weigh their
behaviour against the weight of thy own weakness. If thou
seekest, begin with hope, then thou wilt be helped. And be
not incredulous lest thou be left by Him that sows these things
in thee, so that thou reach the measure of thine own small-
ness, whatever it be, in contrast to those who have vanquished
the world and its confusion absolutely.
If thou doest not believe the church, approach unto the
philosophers. Then thou wilt see, how much power the will
possesses to be uplifted above the body and to remain with-
out confusion according to the choice of him that chooses.
When thou seest how these, who did not know God, have
displayed in the face of the world the endurance and vigour
of a heroic will, and how they have shown how much for—ce
inner nature possesses to vanquish everything if it like
a man will be struck with amazement in reading their histories
at the power which God has assembled in this nature, that,
if we like, we can vanquish everything. But because we do
not will, we preach the weakness of nature. And while we
hide the vigour of nature by the weakness of our will, we
say; Who should ever be able to vanquish these things?

;
How Patience for the sake of* the love etc. 271
One of them had mastered the will of the body to such a
degree, 'that, in order not to give up and to deviate from the
choice he. had made, he did not even allow his mind to be
disturbed when the sword was drawn so fear of death could
;
not break through the barrier he had made for himself. When
4°4 for many years he had kept silence, the king of the Greeks,
wondering at his fame and desiring to put him to the test,
ordered him to appear before him. As the philosopher remained
silent whenever the king spoke and questioned him, giving no
answer, the king grew angry and ordered him to be put to
death, because he was not even impressed by the glory of
his throne and crown. The philosopher was not moved by
this [order], but kept his rule quietly. Then the king ordered
the executioners to slay him if he should break his rule out
of fear of the sword ; but to bring him back living if he should
be firm of will. When the moment had come and the execu-
tioners commanded him to bend his will or die, he deliberated
thus : it is better once to suffer death, while keeping the rule
of my will which I have borne all this time, than to give
way out of fear of death, putting to shame my wisdom, and
be found a coward because of th — at which I shall have to
meet at any rate, whenever it be. By this firmness of will
and this heroic mind he was delivered even from death, being
found just and true to his rule. Doest thou see what power
will possesses? This sage stretched his neck before the sword
without breaking his own rule.
Others have trampled upon the desire of nature and have
tamed it by the bridle which they have put into its mouth.
Others have remained unmoved before disdain. Others have
405 been found consistent and without wrath, before blows. Some
have suffered from their equals what could hardly be borne
others from people who were by far their inferiors. Others
have remained without feelings of enmity or anger while their
possessions were robbed. Others have shown endurance under
horrible and severe illnesses, without being troubled, and have
added even other ascetic practices. Some have performed
voluntary labours, others have practised total nakedness, apart
from the covering demanded by chastity, or a solitary life,
and support of life by raw food. Thus king Alexander, when
once he went to see one of them, did not hear anything from
him except on contempt of the world.

I'Jl HOW PATIENCE FOR THE SAKE OF THE LOVE ETC.
All this [they practised] lest they should be withheld from
meditation and the occupying themselves with their wisdom.
If the labour of instruction and the discipline ofwisdom, apart
from the fear of God and the light of faith and the hope of
a world to be, are able to perform such heroic deeds, who
then should not be despised by his own conscience, that not-
withstanding all the light of Christ which is poured out on
the world, and the great gifts which are lavished abundantly
in secret, and the — hope on God which day by day is con-
firmed by events still the difficulties and the pleasure of
this body are master of him, so that he does not remain as
a diamond for the sake of the love of God, despising every-
thing joyfully?
If it is poss—ible to be in doubt as to how men vanquish all
406 these things every wise man knows that no one can do
anything by his own power. But it is possible, because by God's
help and a firm will he finds all things weaker than himself.
By these the zeal of the solitaries has been kindled, so that
they have abandoned and suddenly given up the world and
what belongs to it, and have become strong withstanding all
contrary things and, by endurance of will and by the help of
their Lord, have vanquished all difficulties whatsoever. For
they dwelt in the midst of them. Many of them were adherents
of the doctrine of the philosophers, saying If external sages,
:
in spite of the fact that they were not on the way of God,
have taken upon themselves, in return for transitory wisdom
and training in the instruction of this temporary world, to
bear these things, and have become alienated to the world
and apart from it in their dealings, so as to reach, the desire
of their will, though there was no just basis in their thoughts
nor hope of inmortality in their labours, performing these thin—gs
to this high degree with a view to a vain expectation
how much more are we bound to endure for the sake of the
love of God and to despise all difficulties for the sake of the
sublime future which has been promised us.
So they have been confirmed by this thought and have
mastered the laxity of their deliberations and have entered
the arena and turned not their backs until they have gained
the crown. They were an example even for later generations,
and have shown the world how those who walk this way
have to enter the arena.

ON THOSli WHO LtVIC IN THK NKlGIIJJOURHOOl) KTC.
1J$
LVIII
407 ON THOSE WHO LIVE IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD
OF GOD AND PASS ALL THEIR DAYS IN A LIFE
OF KNOWLEDGE
Blessed is he that leads a watchful life in this world. A
certain Father had written on all the walls of his cell various
things, and all kinds of thoughts, and admirable words on
every context. He was asked: What are these, o Father?
He answered : These are deliberations of justice that occur to
me through the angel that is with me and through the right
impulses of nature. I write them down when I am in these
apartments, in order that I may be occupied with them in the
time of darkness, and that they may save me from error.
So a man ought to do all his days.
A certain Father was called happy by his own thoughts
which praised him thus: In stead of the world that passes,
thou hast been deemed worthy of the indestructible hope. The
Father said to them : Why do ye call me happy, while I am
still alive? I do not know what will happen to me till my
death. I am still on the way; happiness is not certain before
I have reached my home.
Indeed, this is a just deliberation. It is becoming that we
should appoint our day of death as the term of victory. Before
death, he that triumphs is no real victor. For his enemies are
living and the way is before him, and he does not know
4o8 where he may be entangled ; for his way is not safe, and he
has not yet reached the time of trust. Thus he that is
entangled in evil things has not to be dejected ; for it is
possible for him to gain life, as he is still alive. There is
hope for him as well as for the one that behaves well.
Why
doest thou rebuke the sinner, o man? The labours of
thine own merchandise have not yet entered the harbour; the
hope of him over whom thou art extolling thyself, has not
been cut off by God. It is possible that within a short time
he will surpass thee in excellence and come nearer to God
than thou art. F"or death has not yet come and concluded
his affair, nor thine. Many vicissitudes happen to a man during
Vurh. Aft!. Utlcrk. ,9,2 (Wcnsi„,:ki- ,8

274 o:sr THOSE WHO LIVE IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD ETC.
his life. But it is God who looks to the end and not to the
things in the middle. There have been many righteous who
fell from their righteousness, and sinners have come up and
taken their place. Therefore the righteous should not extol
himself, he is still alive; nor shall the sinner be dejected, for
God is near to him if he seeks Him, and prepared to receive
him when he changes his behaviour and turns towards Him.
If thou hast wrought righteousness without perceiving the taste
of its profit, then be not amazed.
Until a man becomes humble, he does not receive the wages
of his service. Remuneration is not given for service, but for
humbleness. He that wrongs the latter, looses the former.
He who has taken upon him the service of excellence is
409 inferior to him that has first taken upon him the excellence
of service. Excellence is the mother of afflictions ; from afflic-
tions humbleness is born. The gift is given for humbleness. Con-
sequently remuneration does not belong to excellence, nor to
pains for its sake, but to humbleness which is born from it.
Now if humbleness fails, the other ones arc vain. The service
of excellence is the observance of the commandments of our
Lord. The excellence of service is steadiness of mind, which is
established by humbleness and watchfulness. Where the power
necessary for the performance of the former ones fails, the lat-
t I er is rec j eived instead of them. So Christ does not seek the
service of the commandments, but the steadiness of the soul,
for the sake of which He also has laid commandments upon
rational beings. The body works with the right and with the
left part, equally. But the mind, as is becoming, is either
justified or condemned.
Some serve life by left-hand things, through wisdom from
God and some acquire sin under the appearance of acquiring
;
divine things. Shortcomings in sundry things in which those
who are watchful are entangled, are permitted by God in order
to guard their righteousness, that their trespasses and failures
may become to them a cause of humbleness.
Humbleness protects many men for their service, not only
withholding them from haughtiness, but by the recollection their
[trespasses] they become humble and receive higher wages.
Without blows a gift cannot be kept. A gift without temp-
410 tations is found to cause the destruction of those who have
received it.

ON THOSK WHO LIVE IN THE NEfGIinOURHOOD ETC. 275
If thou hast served well before God, and Me has given
thee a gift for thy steadfastness regarding Him, in order to
spur thee on the more and to give thee joy in thy service,
then let Him give thee knowledge so as to know how it is
necessary to humble thyself; otherwise he would appoint a
prosecutor or take it again from thee, lest there should be a
chance for its being lost. It is not given to every one to
guard riches without damage.
The soul that takes upon itself the trouble of excellence
and lives in the veracious fear of God cannot be without daily
afflictions. Virtues and afflictions are interwoven.
He who abandons troubles also abandons excellence entirely.
Who
clings to excellency, clings to afflictions. If thou desirest
excellence, thou givest thyself over to all afflictions. Excellence
is the mother of afflictions ; afflictions are the mother of hum-
bleness. For God does not desire that the soul should be with-
out care. And he that desires this, his mind is found to be
without God's will. By care I do not mean care concerning
bodily things, but concerning the oppression that persecutes
virtues. For before we reach true knowledge, which is the
revelation of hidden things, we have to come near to hum-
bleness through temptations. He that is found to be without
afflictions in his excellence, for him a door unto haughtiness
is opened. How can he who desires this [excellence] be without
affliction in his mind? It is not possible that the mind remain
4'i in humbleness if there is no reason for blows. And it is not
possible that without humbleness it should remain in perpetual
supplication unto God, in serenity.
First man is removed from the thought of his duty in his
mind, then the spirit of haughtiness approaches him. At first
the angel of care suffers this , but afterwards it withdraws
itself from him. As long as the angel is near him, he provides
him solely with thoughts of righteousness. But when he has
wronged the angel and it has withdrawn itself from him, then
a foreign power approaches him, and no single just thought
will furthermore be in him. Haughtiness comes before ruin,
says the sage ') ; so humbleness before a gift. By the quantity
of haughtiness which is found in the soul, is judged the scale
of ruin which is on the point of being sent to it by God.
1) I'mverbs iC, 19

1j6 ON THOSE WHO LIVE IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD ETC.
For none of the sins does God withdraw from man, leaving
him wholly because He dislikes him, until lie finds the mind
seized with haughtiness or blasphemy. And the former [of
.
these two) becomes the cause of the latter.
Those who in their mind leave the way of humbleness and
so become devoid of divine help, either fall into the impurity
of lasciviousness, or into blasphemy, or into mental ruin.
Those who extol themselves on account of excellent beha-
viour, usually fall into into evil lasciviousness those who extol
;
themselves on account of knowledge and mental discipline,
into blasphemy or trouble of mind.
I laughtiness is not the state in which such deliberations
412 pass through the mind, nor when the mind is sometimes over-
powered by them, but when the mind clings to them. It is
manifest that even for such a one there is repentance. But
when he loves haughtiness, he does not know how the repent.
If he does repent, he does not cling to haughtiness. Not
that the evil man sins or commits a fault against God, but
that he clings to his evil [is the great thing For the former
J.
denotes the weakness of nature, the latter audaciousness of
the will.
Also by praises on the part of his fellowmen is a man's
mind struck with madness, when he desires to perform among
them deeds which are above his measure, in order that the
glory of his greatness may increase, and men may perceive
that he is very near to God. Many have excelled in behaviour
and were rich in gifts from God and have been honoured with
the gift of [performing) signs. But afterwards they became
changed and received a blow from God, the same men that
were so honoured before. The cause of this was that they
were not able to bear the many gifts which they had received
and were drawn towards haughtiness and were rejected by
God as dross and became foreign to the high rank in which
they were. And many who were quiet and firm in mind,
whose words were weighed, whose behaviour was chaste, whose
knowledge was envied, have become an object of fear for
those who know them and a lamentable aspect for those who
see them.
With loud weeping raise thy voice unto God and beg for
41- humbleness. Fill thy mouth with thy tears and stray ashes on
thy head. Do not rise from the earth nor lift up thy head

:
ON TIIOSK WHO LIVE IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD ETC. 2JJ
from the ground, before God has shown thee mercy and has
made thee to pass away from this life, saved; or till He has
compassion upon thee and gives thee humbleness. And do not
desist from mourning before perceiving that thou hast received
it, lest thou shouldst be found suddenly as one of these l
).
And even when thou hast received [humbleness], do not lift
up thy eyes, nor look towards the sky, nor satisfy thy eyes
with the aspect of men nor let thy heart have rest from fear
and prayer. Perhaps thou wilt be saved from the evils which
are prepared by the demons, in this discipline full of dark-
ness, narrow, with many stumbling-blocks, incomprehensible to
human nature.
Believe me, my brother and consider my words as true
thou art not able to understand all the power of the demons,
and thy knowledge is not sufficient to remain standing before
their artifices. Let now therefore be poured out within thee
a stream of light, in which the love of Christ is found and
by which thou art conducted within the wall of divine mercy,
to the honour of the humbleness which thou hast found.
When thou enterest into the darkness of temptations where
the light withdraws itself and thou art given over to be
tempted in that thick darkness of the soul into which those
enter who are abandoned by God and given over to the
demons, then thou wilt know that thou findest thyself face-
414 to-face with them as a child that does not know where Jo go.
All thy knowledge will be confuse as a little child. Thy mind
which was firm in God, thy veracious knowledge, and thy
sound spirit will be in the midst of the ocean of doubts.
By one thing canst thou vanquish them by humbleness alone.
:
As soon as thou takest hold of this, their whole power vanishes.
Do not take it for [a sign) of the health of thy soul when
thou goest thy course in serenity through thy joy in God, but
when thy being bound up with [earthly things does not turn
|
thy mind away from the love of God or thy neighbour, nor
thy connection with several persons from thinking of our Lord,
to whom be the glory. May He keep us near to Him and in
intercourse with Him. Amen.
1) who have been described iti the above passage

;
2jS A L'ROMTAIiLK DISCOURSE
LIX
A PROFITABLE DISCOURSE
True is the word of our Lord who has said that no one
can possess love of God side by side with love of the world
nor mingle with the world and with God, nor care for the
world and care for God. Apart from all that is connected
with vain g"lory, many of us generally deviate because of
bodily want, we who have promised to serve the kingdom
of heaven but who do not remember the promise of our
Lord who has said If ye bestow all your care upon the
:
4'5 kingdom of heaven, I shall not leave you in want of the
needs of sensible nature ; but these things will come to you
spontaneously before yc think of their use at the time of want,
although I do not even let you want because of care for them.
Upon the soulless fowls which have been created in your
behalf, God bestows care and should lie neglect you that
•,
care for righteousness? To him that cares for spiritual things,
even partially, bodily things are prepared even when he does
not provide for them, in accordance with their necessity and
in their time.
He that shows care for the last named things more than
is becoming, will fall from God, even involuntarily. While we
bestow care upon things connected with the name of our Lord,
He will provide us with both kinds, in accordance with the
measure of our care and the importance of the want of each
of them. We should however not ask God's care in these
bodily things for ourselves as a remuneration for our labours,
but we should direct our whole service towards the future
hope. For he that once has given himself to excellence with
the love of his soul and longs after its service with his whole
being, does not think of looking after bodily things, whether
they are or are not. Mow many times does God allow the
friends of excellence to be tempted by such things And not
!
only this but Fie even allows many evil things to assail them
;
from all sides; and He smites their body, as in the case of
416 Job, and gives poverty entrance to them an lets them be
deprived of their human state, and smites them in all that

:
A I'ROI'lTAIirj-; DISCOURSE 279
they possess, with this restriction only, that the plague should
not attain to their life.
It is not possible that we should walk in the way of right-
eousness and that no troubles should hurt us, nor that the
body should not suffer illness and pains, nor that we should
remain without varying states, if we really desire to live in
excellence. That however a man should wilfully kill or injure
himself or harm himself in any way, is a cause of damnation.
If he walks in the way of righteousness and follows his course
towards God, together with many of his fellows, and one of
these things should hurt him on his way, it is not becoming
for him to deviate but he shall accept them joyfully without
;
scrutiny, thanking God because He has given him His gift,
God for whose sake he has been deemed worthy to be en-
tangled in temptations so as to become associated with the
sufferings of prophets and apostles and the other saints who
have endured troubles on behalf of the way of God [thanking
;
God] because He has deemed him worthy to bear afflictions
for the way of excellence, even though they should happen
through men, or through the demons or through the body.
These things are not permitted without the divine will, but
they happen in order that thou mayest have a cause of right-
eousness. For it is not possible that God should give the op-
portunity of becoming excellent to him that desires to be with
Him, otherwise than by bringing him into contact with temp-
tations for the sake of truth.
That a man himself is not able to become worthy of such
417 a greatness that he should be led into temptations in behalf
of these divine things with joy, but only by a gift from Christ,
is witnessed by the blessed apostle. For so great is this thing,
that he openly calls it a gift that a man for the sake of the
hope in God should be prepared to suffer by faith, saying
For unto you it is given from God, not only to believe in
Christ, but also to suffer for his sake l
).
Then thank without a break Him that has delivered you
from the dominion of the darkness of the world and has brought
you near the kingdom of His son, and has made you fellows
of all the children of light who have suffered for the sake of
God, m order that you may gain the part that has fallen to
1) Philippians I,29

280 A L'ROFITAI'.LK DISC'OURSK
the lot of the saints in the light. And this is what Peter writes
in his epistle : But if ye suffer for righteousness' sake, happy
are ye '). For you will have a share in Christ's suffering. There-
fore, when thou art free from affliction, do not leap up with
joy, nor when circumstances assail thee cover thy face with
sadness, reckoning this as something foreign to the way of God.
Behold, for years and generations, the way of God has
been leveled by the cross and by death. How is this with
thee, that thou seest the afflictions of the way as if they were
out of the way? Doest not thou wish to follow the steps of
the saints? Or doest thou wish to go a way which is especially
4'8 for thee, without suffering? The way unto God is a daily cross.
No one can ascend unto heaven with comfort, we know where
the way of comfort leads.
If any one trusts himself with his whole heart to God, God
never wishes to take care away from him, namely care for
the sake of truth. But thereby he knows that he is guided
by God, when He continually sends him afflictions. But those
who are guided under afflictions, are never allowed by divine
care to fall into the hands of the demons, especially when
they kiss the feet of the brethren and hide and cover their
shortcomings as if they were their own.
He that wishes to be without care in the world yet guided
by excellence, loathes this way. As the blessed commentator
says in his interpretation of Matthew For those who long
:
after excellence, it is not possible to flee from afflictions, For
afflictions will necessarily increase to the same measure as the
soid fights against contrary powers. But when afflictions leave
it, the soul in the first place leaves what belongs to it.
He that says that he is without care, yet is guided by
excellence, does not even know whence excellence is born in
the soul. For we know what are the governors of excellence.
By temptations the gate of heaven is opened before the soul.
Our bathers have guided us in this way. God who gives unto
His saints victory in strife so that their deliberations are not
turned away from the future hope, will guard and help us by
their prayers. Amen.
419 The righteous not only excel in beautiful works by their
will but even in involuntary temptations they excel greatly by
1) 1 Peter 3,14

A PROFITABLE DISCOURSE 2cSl
their tried patience, because they valiantly endure all earthly
troubles, expecting the amazing wages of the world to be.
The soul which clings to the fear of God does not fear before
anything which harms the body.
LX
THAT WITHOUT NECESSITY WE SHOULD NOT
DESIRE NOR ASK THAT ANY SIGN SHOULD MA-
NIFESTLY HAPPEN THROUGH US OR UNTO US
The Lord who is always near the saints through the signs
of help He sends to them, does not show, without necessity,
His power manifestly by performing any perceptible sign, lest
the things which are meant to help us, should become impo-
tent or a means to bring us harm. Such is His way, though
He care for them to such an extent; that His secret providence
does not abandon them one moment. But in all things hie
allows them to show care according to their power and to
fatigue themselves by prayer.
If however the matter is so difficult, that the scale of their
knowledge should become too light, after they have spent
their force and resigned because nature is not sufficient [for
such a taskj, He will give His supply according to the great-
ness of His power, as is becoming and profitable to them in
420 His" mind. As long as possible He strengthens them secretly
in order that they may remain standing before that difficulty.
By the knowledge which He grants them He causes its bond
to be loosened, and by contemplation He excites them unto
glorification, in order that the matter may be of proiit to
both parties.
If however the case wants manifest action, He will proceed
to give this, for necessity's sake. His acts of providence are
wise, serving necessity, not chance.
He that without necessity ventures upon this, begging from
God and desiring that wonders and powers should happen
through himself, is found to be tempted l ) of the scornful demon
in his heart, and even a boaster and one sick in heart.
F"or to ask God's help in trouble, is becoming. But to tempt
1) Rending >.OalSO with lieiljan and the Greek translation (TSipx^o/iSjoq}

2<S2 THAT WITHOUT NliCKSSITV WE SHOULD KTC.
without necessity, is a dangerous thing. He is not even truly
a righteous one, who desires this. But that which the Lord
does without any man's will, is found by most of the saints.
That a man should desire this wilfully, without necessity, is
apostasy from watchfulness and aberration from true knowledge.
And if he that asks is heard on this point, because of his
t
daring and his persuading our Lord, he is led unto a thing
which is still more serious. liut those who are truly righteous,
do not desire this ; and they not only do not count upon this
421 but they do not even ask for it, if it is given them neither
;
before the eyes of men, nor even privately.
Unto one of the saints, because of his serenity, the gift
was granted that he knew beforehand if any one should visit
him but he asked God, and he persuaded others to pray for
;
this, that the gift might be taken away from him.
The Fathers did not use this freedom of speech not even
in times of necessity. When the blessed Amnion, a holy man
in truth, one of the admirable Fathers, went to the great Mar
Antonius and wandered in the desert he did not say: O God
—
take me up and set me clown there where Antonius is
though he would have been able to do something- like this,
because of his being near to God, and because this was a
case of necessity ; for it is said that those who are wandering
in this desert incur danger. Notwithstanding all these things,
he did not say this to God, but said only this word O Lord,
— :
let not Thy creature perish. - Doest thou perceive the humble-
ness, doest thou understand the true wisdom ofthe Fathers? And
422 God, because He knew that the man was true and not led
in his deliberations by haughtiness, showed unto him His care
for the saints, and did to the man as his greatness deserved.
And so, though Amnion did not beseech, God did what was
becoming. For Amnion lay clown to sleep; and rising he saw
as it were the hand of a man hanging above his head in the
sky and showing him the way, till it we — nt and stood still
above the cave of the blessed Antonius. Doest thou per-
ceive God's care for His housemates? It would have been
possible even not to let him err. But God desired that Amnion
should know how much He cared for him. So He let Him
err and showed him afterwards manifestly the way, not through
a man, but through an angel and in the air. Blessed be God's
care for the saints.

;
THAT WITHOUT NECESSITY WE SHOULD ETC. 283
Recollect also what happened to Aba Macarius. When he
went to Skete, bearing baskets, and grew fatigued and weary,
he sat down because he could not walk any longer. But he
did not ask from God that lie should do unto him anything,
by Mis influence, to give him comfort. But he trusted himself
unto God saying : O God, thou knowest that I have no more
strength. Then at once, in a moment, by divine influence, he
was taken up and placed there whether he wished to go, he
and his baskets.
Those who are righteous in truth, constantly think in their
heart that they are not worthy of God. And they consider
themselves as true in so far as they deem themselves to be
wretches. And they sincerely confess, secretly and openly that
they are not worthy of His care. And as sinners and wretches
423 they bestow care and painstaking upon everything and trust
themselves unto God, in faith, though, as far as their strength
goes they do not desist from what they ought to do, being
instructed by the Spirit that they should not neglect to care
for their duty but to labour as long as they live.
The time of rest He has preserved for the world to be.
And those in whom God dwells do not desire that they may
have rest here and be liberated from torments, although con-
solation in spiritual things is given unto them from time to
time in secret.
Excellence is not that a man, on reaching it, should give
up care and painstaking. But this is [the sign of] the imma-
nence of the Spirit, that a man constantly subdues and compels
himself, even if it should be possible to perform the thing in
comfort. For the will of the Spirit is not to accustom those
in whom it dwells to laziness and to invite them to comfort,
but to labours and greater trouble. And it will teach them
alertness and confirm them by temptations and lead them
towards wisdom.
It is the will of the Spirit that those who love it, be in
vexations. In those who pass their life in comfort, not the
Spirit of God but the Spirit of Satan dwells. The Spirit of
God is not pleased with bodily comfort, nor does it find plea-
sure in a life of comfort, but in a life of vexations. Satan on
the other hand finds pleasure in a life full of comfort, according
to Our Lord's witness. The Holy Spirit flees from comfort
424 as it is said by the holy Fathers : The Spirit of God does not

:
284 THAT WITHOUT NECESSITY WE SHOULD KTC.
dwell in a body softened ') by comfort. But it looks after a
place where people strain themselves, with an emaciated body,
and a prepared soul ; and with them it takes habitation, tea-
ching them how to live during this small space of time.
Those who love God complete their life under all kinds of
trouble. For all the righteous have driven out this world by
means of vexations. According as they came nearer to God,
their vexations increased. For one of them said with oaths
I die every day. I conjure you by your honour, o my brethren,
that it has been given me in our Lord Jesus Christ to die
every day. Therein they differ from other men and that God
;
lives in them [appears from the fact] that they live in troubles
whereas the world delights in comfort. God has not chosen
that those who love Him should enjoy bodily comfort, but it
is His will that as long as they live they should be in trouble
in the world, afflicted, vexed, needy and lonely; naked and
poor sick, scorned and beaten. A standing place they have
;
not ; their heart is broken; their body is humbled; their acquain-
tances disavow them; their mind is full of distress; their aspect
is strange to all creatures ; their dwelling place is strange to
all mankind ; their habitation is solitary and lonely, bereft of
the sight of the world, void of every sign of the things which
cause joy in this world ; destitute of any comfort. Mourning,
425 is found in it; joy, is far from it; afflictions, arc frequent in
it. They do not even possess plenty of that which the body
needs as all men do. Their bed is the ground their faces are
;
parched by fasting; their knees tremble from weakness. Their
internal organs are unfitted for their customary purpose through
service alien to human habit. They weep, and the world
laughs. They are sorry, and the world is joyful. They fast,
and the world takes comfort. All creatures enjoy a sweet
sleep, and they wake in prayer. During the day they are
wearying themselves and during the night they prepare them-
selves for struggle. The saints live a bitter life in the world,
with a humbled body, an afflicted soul and in distress on
all sides.
Thus it is the will of God that all those who are near to
Him should live in miserable circumstances, being humbled
and wretched in their whole soul and body ; some through
1) Dwell and softened are expressed l>y the same root in Syriac

THAT WITHOUT NF.CKSSITY WE SHOULD ETC. 285
voluntary troubles some through the vexations caused by their
;
sufferings; some through the bitter pains which they bear in
their bodies some through the misery and the persecutions
;
of men danger of sufferings, danger of the demons, danger
;
of illnesses, danger of poverty. Others have been persecuted;
others have been put to death others have been sawn
r
asunder; others have been stoned; others have been drowned
in the sea; others have had their limbs cut off alive; others
have been delivered to scorn and contempt others have been
;
426 punished by the flames, others by prison, others by terrible
m
fl°gS £; others have been delivered to the sword; others
have gone round, clad in hides of lambs and goats, and have
become as lost in the desert. Troubles the saints have under-
gone on mountains and in caverns and in the holes of the
earth. Of such people according to the witness of the apostle,
the world was not worthy. But what is more marvellous than
all these things, they did not expect to be saved or to find
rest on account of all these according to the word of the
blessed apostle. Glory to Him that crowned them, Me that
by the suffering of the cross has also completed this path
with all its previous sufferings, that also His saints may fol-
low His steps.
Fulfilled has been the word of our Lord In the world ye
:
shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have good cheer *).
By the force of this good cheer, these saints acquire the power
to be patient. May God, by whose power the saints have been
patient in these struggles without becoming weak in their hope,
strengthen His hope in us all. Amen.
Without troubles, no life. God did know that two kinds of
gladness cannot be in one man. And because it is impossible
to cling to His love when the body is in comfort, He has
withheld men from this, and has strengthened His love in
their soul by bereaving them from all worldly pleasure. May
Christ, whose love is stronger than death and fire a — nd sword
427 and exile and alienation from family and loss of life and — no
difficulties can remain standing before His love of His friends
reveal in us the power of His love. Amen.
I) John 16,33

286 for which causes cod admits temptations etc.
LXI
FOR WHICH CAUSES GOD ADMITS TEMPTATIONS
TO HIS FRIENDS
By the love which the saints show unto God in return for
what they bear for the sake of His name in that they undergo
trials without leaving the excellency which God loves, their
heart acquires freedom to look towards Him without a veil
and to ask from Him with confidence.
Great is the power of prayer in freedom of speech. There-
fore He allows that His saints are tried by all afflictions, on
the way towards Him, in order that they may acquire freedom
of speech and may experience His help and His care for them
in that He is found to be their saviour in danger-, and in
order that His friends may acquire wisdom through temptations
so that they are not dull and destitute of training. So through
temptation they acquire knowledge concerning everything, and
are not laughed at lightly by the demons.
F"or if He would train them by good things only they would
lack training in other things and they would be as blind men
in trials. And if someone should say : He guides them without
training" and without selfknowledge [the conclusion would bej
that He wished them to be like oxen and asses who possess
42S no freedom whatever. There is even no taste in the good,
when a man has not first been tried by temptations of evil
and afterwards finds it and when he does not use it as his
own, in knowledge and freedom. How sweet that knowledge
is which has been acquired through training and the experience
of labours, and how much strength it imparts to him that has
found it after many personal experiences, is known to those
who are acquainted with the help afforded by it.
They learn the weakness of nature and the help afforded
by divine power when He first withdraws power from them
while they are in temptations. Then they perceive the weak-
ness of nature and the strength of temptations and the wicked-
ness of the Fiend, [perceiving] of which nature their Fiend
is, with which nature they are clad, and how they are guarded
by divine power; and how, though they run and are uplifted,

FOR WHICH CAUSKS GOD ADMITS TEMPTATIONS ETC. 287
when the divine power withdraws itself from them, they become
weak before all passions.
Through all this they acquire humbleness, and press close to
God, expecting- Mis help and persevering in prayer. Mow could
they have acquired all this, if they had not experienced myriads
of evils, without God's caring for their being surrounded by them?
'And lest I should be exalted through the abundance of revela-
tions, there was given me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger
of Satan' T
).
Man acquires also a confirmed faith by temptations, through
experiencing divine help, when it is granted several times.
And furthermore he is without fear and acquires courage by
temptation, on account of the training he acquires.
429 Temptation is useful to every man. The virtuous are temp-
ted in order that their riches may increase the lax, in order
;
that they may be preserved from injuries; the sleepy, in order
that they may be armed with alertness those that are afar
;
off that they may come nearer to God the housemates, that
;
they may approach with freedom of speech.
A
son that is not trained, cannot profit by the riches that
are given to him from his father's house. Therefore God tempts
and vexes first, then He shows His gift. Glory to that Lord
who by strong drugs brings us the delight of health. There
is no one, to whom the time of exercise is not hard ; and
there is no one, to whom the time during which he is obliged
to drink the potion of temptations, is not bitter. But without
this, a sound constitution cannot be obtained. Even to endure
is not of our own. How should a clay vessel endure the
vehemence of the waters, if the divine fire had not hardened
it? If we daign to ask in humbleness fervently and persever-
m £"ly> we shall receive everything.
1) 2 Cor. 12, 7

288 THAT 11Y THI<: THOUGHTS WHICH STIR IN A MAN ETC
LXII
THAT BY THE THOUGHTS WHICH STIR IN A MAN
HP. KNOWS TO WHICH DEGREE HE BELONGS AND
WHICH THOUGHTS FOLLOW
As long1 as a man is negligent, he fears the hour of death;
when, however, he comes near to God, the coming of Judg-
ment. But when he proceeds firmly, both kinds of fear are
taken away. How does this happen ? While l ) his knowledge
430 and his behaviour are of a bodily nature, he is frightened by
death. But when his knowledge is of a psychic nature, and
his behaviour is steadfast, his mind is moved by the thought
of Judgment every moment. In the first state he belongs wholly
to nature ; in the psychic state he is moved and guided by
his knowledge and by his discipline. And he is happy in the
neighbourhood of God. But when he reaches true knowledge
by the motion of the apperception of God's mysteries and be-
comes confirmed in future hope, he is consumed by love.
He that is bodily, fears as an animal fears being slaugh-
tered he who is rational fears the Judgment of God. He that
;
has become a son, is pleasing to love, not to the staff of him
who terrifies. ,1 and my house, we will serve the Lord' ").
For love annihilates fear. It not only felars not but it even
longs after departure. Love is the dissolver of temporary life.
He that has reached the love of God, docs not desire to stay
here any more.
My beloved ones, because I was foolish, I could not bear
to guard the secret in silence, but am become mad, for the
sake of my brethren's profit. Lor true love is not able to
cling to the cause of love apart from friends.
Oft when I was writing these things, my fingers paused on
the paper. They could not bear the delight which had fallen
into the heart and which made the senses silent. Blessed is
he that is in constant intercourse with God and has withdrawn
himself from worldly things, being with Him only, in inter-
course founded upon his knowledge. And if he has to be
patient, it will not be long before he sees fruits.
1) lutrounclion 2) Joshun 24,15

THAT BY THE THOUGHTS WHICH STIR IN A MAN ETC. 289
431 Gladness in God is tronger than earthly life. He that has
found it, is not only free from the trial of the affections, but
he does not even turn towards his life any longer. Further-
more he has no other apperception, if he really has been
deemed worthy of this.
Love is sweeter than life. And understanding concerning
God, from which love is born, is sweeter than honey and
honeycomb. What is the sweetness of love which excels life?
Love is not spiteful if it has to undergo a myriad of deaths
for the sake of its friends.
Love is the child of knowledge, knowledge the child of
health of soul. Health of soul is a power born from patient
endurance. And what is knowledge? The apperception of im-
mortal life. What is immortal life? Apperception in God.
Knowledge concerning God is the highest of all desirable
things. And the heart that has received it, does not want
the sweetness of anything on the earth. Because to the
sweetness of the knowledge concerning God nothing is to
be compared.
O Lord, fill my heart with life everlasting. Life everlasting
is consolation in God. He that has found consolation in God,
to him the consolation of the worki is superfluous. How is it
perceived in a man that he has received wisdom from the
Spirit? Thereby, that wisdom teaches him kinds of humbleness,
internally and by his senses; then it is revealed to him in his
intellect, how humbleness is acquired.
432 How is it to be perceived that he has reached humbleness?
Thereby that it is a vile thing to him to please this world
by act or word, and thereby that the glory of this world is
ugly in his eyes.
What are the affections? The allurements that lie in the
things and the stories of this world, evoking a bodily want,
which never cease as long as the world exists. If a man how-
ever has been deemed worthy [to know] the divine intellect
and to taste and perceive what is more profitable than those
things, their allurements will not enter his heart, because their
place has been taken by a desire which is better than those.
Then the allurements of [worldly] things and those which are
born from them, will no longer approach his heart. But they
will stand outside idle. Not that the allurements of the affec-
tions do not exist any longer, but the heart which could
Verb. Afd. Lettcrk. 19*2 (Wensinck). 19

29O THAT BY THE TIIOL'GHTS WHICH STIR IN A MAN ETC.
receive them is dead to them and living to some other thing.
Not that it desists from watchfulness and the labour of dis-
crimination, but there is no longer any struggle in the mind,
in as much as the inner being is satisfied by the delight of
some other thing. So, when a man is satisfied with delicious
and fat food, and his inner being with abundance and delight,
and then he sees food which is unclean and steeped in its
own filth, his inner being does not need care to check it from
desire or to withhold it from gazing at it with lust; nay, the
whole inner being is even shaken and troubled by the sight
433 of it. This does not happen on account of the uncleanness of
the food, for possibly he had been accustomed to it before;
but on account of the comparison with the excellence of that
other food which had filled his inner being with every delight.
So it is with the health of the soul. If the heart has really
received the apperception of spiritual things and the contem-
plation of the world to be, its inner being will regard the
affections in the way mentioned.
And just as a man when he loses his riches and becomes
poor and destitute of the glorious and excellent food in which
he delighted in the royal palace, forgets its delicious taste,
and those glorious dishes are no longer with him and his
stomach is deprived of the delight of their abundance, and — he
has necessarily to turn towards food which is by far inferior
so it is with him that was deemed worthy of health of soul.
If he is deprived of that divine delight because he neglects
his duty and falls asleep and becomes neglectful he again turns
towards that sordid food, that has been steeped in all filth
and which is unclean and his inner being does not examine,
;
because the stomach of his soul is empty. For to the hungry
soul even bitter things are sweet.
And farther : no one to whom a treasure is entrusted will
indulge in sleep. If he keeps the law of watchfulness and
434 clings to the labour of discernment, and through knowledge
derived from these drinks in life, the struggle of the allurements
of the affections will not approach his mind at all. And these
allurements will not be held back with effort from entering
the heart, but the satiety of the inner soul which is full of
knowledge, and the desire of amazing visions which is found
in it, restrain them from approaching to man with their inter-
course. This does not happen, as I have said, while man

1;
THAT BY TIIK THOUGHTS WHICH STIR IN A MAN ETC. 29
desists from watchfulness and from the labour of discrimination
which are the guardians of true knowledge and of psychic light
but it happens without the mind being involved in struggle,
for the reasons which have been expounded.
The food of the poor is despicable to the rich and the
nutriment of the sick to the healthy. But riches and health
are established through watchfulness and diligence. This is
witnessed to by nature. As long- as a man lives he needs watch-
fulness and diligence and alertness in order to guard his trea-
sure. But if he leaves his territory, he becomes ill and is
robbed [of his possessions]. For a long time even he will
possess strength through his previous health, but when this
does not increase, he will become a prey to weakness and
indigence. Does not even nature instruct us concerninof these
things? And is there any heavenly thing which cannot be
discussed in a comparison which we find in our nature? Even
our Lord used to confirm all spiritual things by examples from
nature and in this way He used to establish their power in
our souls not only things relating to the shorthving earthly
;
pawn, but also those belonging to the true body, and the
435 completion and the truth of our future. Do not wonder at
what I have said. There is not only work to be done till the
fruit shows itself, but even till the time of gathering the fruit
there is still work to be done. By the time of gathering the
fruit I mean the grave. It may occur that, when the fruit has
become ripe, hail of a sudden will strike it.
He that mingles with things and proceeds to have inter-
course, cannot be certain that his health will stay with him.
I say : using and seeing [are the same]. O Jesus Christ, king
of the worlds, make me worthy of desire in Thee. The man
who adheres to intercourse with God, and who has mingled
his life with it, is greater than any other man on the earth
and [greater] than any service performed by rational creatures.
When thou prayest unto God, say to Him only this O Lord
:
make me worthy of — becoming dead to the intercourse with
this world, in truth. So thou canst comprehend the whole
prayer. And try diligently to accomplish this in thyself in
reality. If prayer is followed by practice, thou surely art standing
in the freedom of Christ.
Being dead to the world is not only this that a man keeps
himself far from mingling with [worldly] things. But this is

292 THAT BY THE THOUGHTS WHICH STIR tN A MAN ETC.
being- dead to the world in truth : that a man in ] ) his mind
does not long after the goods of the world.
If we are accustomed to beautiful meditation, we are eshamed
of the affections when we come in contact with them (this is
known by those who have experienced it in their soul), and so
we shall be ashamed to approach unto their causes.
436 If thou desirest to cling to some work for the sake of the
love of God, then set death as the limit of thy desire for it.
So by practising it, thou wilt be elevated unto the degree of
martyrdom through every suffering and injury which smites
thee within the domain of death, if thou perseverest till the
end without giving way. Meditating upon a feeble deliberation
weakens the power of patience. But the confirmed mind im-
parts a strength which does not belong to nature, to him that
adheres to its contemplation. O Lord, make me worthy of
hating my life, for the sake of life in Thee.
Dealings in this world resemble a copy of a book which
is still in rough draft. What a man desires or whenever he
wishes, something can be added to or taken from it, and so
he may alter his writing. Future dealings resemble documents
drawn up as bonds, provided with the seal of the king, to or
from which it is not allowed to add or subtract anything.
As long as we are in the place where altering is possible,
let us observe ourselves ; and while we have authority over
our lifebook and our book is still between our hands, let us
zealously add [acts of] beautiful behaviour, and let us scratch
We
from it the loss of the old behaviour without freedom.
are allowed to scratch out faults, as long as we are here.
And God will take into account every alteration we make in
it. May we be deemed worthy of life everlasting before we
appear before the king, and He puts His seal on the book2
).
As lono- as we are in this world, God will not put His seal
437 neither on our good works nor on our bad ones, before the
hour of departure, when we have completed the service of
our country and we prepare to strike camp.
So it is becoming for us, as the blessed Mar Ephraim says,
that we make our soul resemble at all times a ship that is
prepared [for seaj. When the wind [required] for her will blow,
1) The text has: in the intercourse or occupation of his mind
2) Cf. the Muslim doctrine of the A^J<y>

THAT I5Y THE THOUGHTS WHICH STIR TN A MAN ETC. 293
she does not know. And the army does not know when the
trumpet will give the sign to start ; and to the tenant it is
not known when the landlord will give the command to depart.
Now
if these are thus prepared for the sake of a short ab-
sence, as they will soon turn perhaps and come back, how
much more is it becoming for us to be prepared and ready
before the long absence of the day of death. May Christ,
the • mediator of our life, grant us to reach that long bridge
and the gate of the new world, in a state of preparation. To
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
LXIII
WHY IT IS THAT PEOPLE WHO ARE IN THE PSY-
CHIC STATE OE KNOWLEDGE CONSIDER SPIRITUAL
THINGS IN ACCORDANCE WITH [THEIR] BODILY
GROSSNESS AND HOW IT IS POSSIBLE THAT THE
MIND BE ELEVATED ABOVE THIS AND WHAT IS THE
CAUSE WHY WE ARE NOT FREED FROM IT AND
WHEN AND HOW IT IS POSSIBLE FOR THE MIND TO
REMAIN WITHOUT IMAGES AT THE TIME OF PRAYER
He whose majesty is blessed, will open the gate before us,
so that we have no single wish than desire of Him. When
438 we so abandon everything, and our mind goes out to seek
Him alone, there will be no thought in it of anything which
screens its face from the aspect of the Lord of the Universe.
The more the mind abandons the thought of visible things,
o my beloved, and the more it thinks of the future hope, in
accordance with the degree of elevation above bodily thoughts
and intercourse with them, to the same extent it will be sub-
tilised and become clear during prayer.
To the same extent as the body, the mind is made free
from the bonds of [worldly] things and to the same extent
;
as it is made free from the ties of thoughts, does it become
cerene ; and to the same extent as it becomes serene, is it also
subtilized •, and to the same extent as it is subtilized, is it
lifted up above the emotions of this world which bears the
stamp of grossness. And it knows that it shall look on God
as He is, not as we are.

:;
294 WHV IT IS THAT PEOPLE WHO ARE ETC.
If a man has not been deemed worthy of revelation before,
it is not possible that he should know this. And if he does
not attain purity, his emotions are not made clear so as to
look at the hidden things. And until through his [spiritual]
riches he be freed from all that is seen, he is not freed from
emotions for those things, and he does not become devoid
of deliberations that cause darkness. And even as darkness
and enchaining thoughts, so the affections are there.
If a man is not made free from all those things which I
have mentioned and from their causes, he cannot consider the
hidden things of the mind. Therefore our Lord has ordered
us to practise renunciation before any other thing, and flight
from the troubles of the world, and freedom from common
human thought. Who does not forsake his whole human state
and all that he possesses, and deny even himself, he cannot
be a disciple to Me ') ; lest the mind be injured by anything
439 by sight, by hearing, by care of [worldly] things, their loss or
their increase, or by man. And thereby that He has bound
our mind by hope of Himself alone, He has caused the whole
care of our deliberations to look towards Himself. And in
Himself He has bound the whole care of our mind, after having
freed it from all other things, that thence we may long after
intercourse with Himself, because of our care being continually
directed towards Himself.
Prayer further requires also training, that through long prac-
tice the mind may become wise. For after renunciation which
frees our impulses from bonds, prayer requires constancy that
through constancy and time the mind may acquire training so
as to know how to restrain its deliberations and to learn
through experience many things which it cannot receive from
others. Any [state of] discipline is prepared2 ) by the preceding
one ; and the preceding one is necessary for the existence of
the following-.
Prayer is preceded by reclusion reclusion [is practised] with
;
a view to prayer prayer in order to acquire love of God
;
for in prayer are found causes for loving God.
Also this we must know, my beloved ones, that any hidden
intercourse, or any meditation upon spiritual things, is to be
denoted by prayer or comprehended under the name of prayer
i) Cf. Puke 14,33 2) literally: educated

;
WHY IT IS THAT PEOPLE WHO ARE ETC. 295
or included within this denomination : be it recitation with dis-
440 crimination, or songs in praise of God, or painstaking thought
of our Lord, or prostration of the body, or psalms of glori-
fication, and so on. For from them is received instruction con-
cerning veracious prayer ; and from the latter love of God is
born. And love is through prayer; and prayer through dwelling
alone. And loneliness serves the purpose, that we should have
a place where we can converse with God in solitude. Lone-
liness is preceded by abandonment of the world.
If a man forsake not the world first and renunciate all that
he possesses, he cannot attain to loneliness. So abandonment of
the world in its turn is preceded by patience, and patience by
hatred of the world hatred of the world by fear and love.
;
For if the mind is not terrified by the fear of Hell and incited
by the love of [future] good, the hatred of this world will not
arise in him. And if the mind does not hate the world, it
cannot forego its intercourse and comfort. And if the mind
has not acquired patience before, it cannot choose dwelling in
solitude without companions. And if it does not choose a lonely
life, it cannot abide in prayer. And if it is not constantly in
intercourse with God and cling to those impulses which are
interwoven with prayer and to those kinds of instruction which
are in prayer, as we have said, it cannot perceive love.
So the love of God proceeds from intercourse with Him
the intercourse of prayer from solitude solitude from renun-
;
ciation renunciation in its turn from patience patience from
; ;
441 hatred of desires ; hatred of desires from fear of Hell and the
expectation of the [future] good. Desires are hated by him
that knows the fruits thereof, namely what they prepare for
him and from what good he is deprived for their sake.
So every discipline is connected with that which precedes
it, takes increase from it and proceeds unto others which are
higher. And if one of the middle links should fail, the fol-
lowing could not maintain itself and it would appear that all
were loosened and lost.

296 ON THE MANY VARYING STATES WHICH CLING ETC.
LXIV
ON THE MANY VARYING STATES WHICH CLING TO
THE MIND AND ARE PURIFIED BY PRAYER
To choose what is good, is the part of the good will of
him that desires this. To accomplish the choice of the excellent
will, this belongs to God and it requires much help on His
part. Therefore we have to combine the good desire which
is awakened in us, with continual prayer. Not only in order
to ask from Him help, but also to discriminate whether it
concords with His will or not. Not every beautiful desire falls
into the heart by divine action, but [onlyj that which is pro-
fitable. There are beautiful things which man may desire though
they do not help him. Such desires may even be sent by
Satan, even though they be esteemed to be helpful. How
many times does the thing desired not fit his measure ; and
442 Satan has contrived it to his detriment, compelling him to ask
it, though he has not yet reached this [stage of] discipline or
though he is a stranger to the rank of its scheme ; or the
time is not fit in which Satan incites him to accomplish these
things-, or he is not able to perform them, either through
[lack of] knowledge, or through bodily weakness, or through
the time not being favorable. At any rate, though it does
seem beautiful, it either troubles him, or it causes him bodily
harm, or it places a hidden snare in his mind.
So, as I have said, we have to combine continual and
diligent prayer with theseemingly good desire which is awakened
in us, saying, every one of us : May it be Thy will regarding
me, to accomplish in fact this good which I have choosen and
which I desire to practise, if it concords with Thy will. To fix
my will on it, is easy to me •, to practise it, is however not
possible for me without a gift on Thy part. Though in truth
both are thine, to will and to do 1 ). P"or it is not without Thy
grace that I have surrendered to or been shaken before that
which stirred in me. It is the custom of him that desires any
good thing with discrimination of mind , to work for it in
1) Cf. Philippians 2,13

ON THE MANY VARYING STATES WHICH CLING ETC. 297
prayer continually; and the force [he acquires] thereby, he
will use as an aid for his service. And then wisdom which
distinguishes truth from falsehood through much prayer and
labour and watchfulness and beautiful loneingf without break,
will come to light, in continual tears, humbleness and heavenly
help, especially when its opponents are deliberations of haughti-
ness which remove from us God's help, and which we can
annihilate by prayer.
LXV
GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING
443
WATCHFULNESS AND DIRECTIONS CONCERNING
THE WAY OF DISCIPLINE BY WHICH A MAN MAY
ACQUIRE A HIGH RANK
Repentance l ) is the mother of life. It opens to us its gate
when we flee from all things. The grace which we have lost,
after baptism, by a lax behaviour, is restored in us by repen-
tance, through discrimination of mind. From water and spirit
we have put on Christ, without perceiving His glory. By
repentance we enter into His delight through the discriminating
love which rises in us.
He who is destitute of repentance, is destitute of future
delight. He who is near to all, is far from repentance. He
who is far from all, with discrimination, is the true repentant.
As soon as a man withdraws from men and concentrates upon
himself, impulses of repentance will show themselves in his
mind, fie receives the seed of life from grace and, as an
embryo, the affection of discrimination moves in him, and in
his heart is stirred the thought of eternal life in the future
and the hope of resurrection and the thought of Judgment.
Do not think that without divine grace suffering falls into
the mind, which receives [it] secretly, as a gift through divine
mercy, because of a sudden contrition and a longing after life.
As also the blessed Euagrius says ^ A purifying drug is the
:
444 hot contrition of the soul, which is given by the Lord through
the angels to those who repent, that through diligence puri-
1) Cf. Introduction

298 GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING ETC.
fication from the affections may be granted. Farther he says:
The fire of a furnace is the hot contrition of the soul, which
through the grace of Christ happens to the soul at the time
of prayer so that the thoughts attain contemplation. Its lack
is cured by living water.
The beginning of repentance is humbleness without artifice.
Splendid garments are a confusion of repentance. The way
towards wisdom is the regulation of the limbs. Bodily effer-
vences are a confusion of wisdom. True wisdom is looking
towards God. Looking towards God is silence of the delibera-
tions. Solitude of the mind is quietness with discrimination.
The moisture of the senses is a fountain of deliberations.
Apperception in God is the depth of humbleness.
True contemplation is the mortification of the heart. The
heart which is really dead to the world, is wholly astir in
God. True mortification is the motion of life. It is better to
smell life by desisting from all, than to build life by desisting
from smelling. Better is he that builds his soul than he that
builds the world. It is better to imbibe life than to distribute
life. He whose outward limbs are dead, his inner emotions
are alive. He whose outward limbs are alive, has killed the
limbs of wisdom. Humbleness with discrimination is true know-
ledge. True knowledge is a fountain of humbleness. He that
is humble in his heart, is humble in his body. He who is
audacious in his body, is audacious in his heart. He who is
445 perturbed in his body, is perturbed in his heart. He who is
perturbed in his heart, is foolish in his mind. He who is foolish
in his mind, his ways are evil. Whose way is evil, he is
dead in life.
If thou lovest humbleness, do not love finery. A man who
loves finery cannot bear contempt. And to take to lonely
works, is difficult to him. And he is ashamed of submitting
to him that is inferior to himself.
The servant of God does not adorn his body. Know that
every man who loves bodily finery is sick in his inner being,
though he performs beautiful [works]. And to every one who
loves visible profit, it is impossible to acquire true love of any
one. And every one who runs after honour, is a slave of this
world. If those who do these things are disliked by thee, then
restrain thyself from the same things.
Humbleness and chastity are promoted by the same idea

GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING ETC. 299
of contempt. And from him that loves honour and finery thou
requirest not the former properties in their truth. If thou lovest
chastity, do not love distraction. Things which happen to
thee through divagation do not allow thee to cling to chastity
with caution. No one who loves distraction, is chaste. And
do not believe that any one who converses with lay people,
is humble. Every one who loves (rod loves a solitary life. That
a man who is given to distraction should guard truth in his
soul without a stain, is impossible.
Many show the appearance of repentance but only he pos-
;
446 sesses it in truth, that is grieved in heart. Many run to find
the affection of the heart ; but only he finds it in truth, that
possesses continual silence. Every one who is a servant of
God, loves grief.
Every one who possesses profuse speech is certainly empty
within, though he tells amazing things.
Inward grief is a bridle of the senses.
If thou lovest truth, thou must love silence. This will make
thee illuminated in God like, the sun and it will deliver thee
from the idle thoughts of ignorance; silence will even unite
thee with God.
When thy kneeling gives thee delight, do not hasten to
reach its end. Would that it never ended as long as thou
art in this life. When thy mind is concentrated, do not cut
off thy prayer. Do not count as idleness a long concentrated
prayer, as against the long recitation of Psalms. Love kneeling
during prayer better than the sound of the sentences. If it
profits thee, then accomplish it instead of thy service.
If the gift of tears be given thee during thy service, do
not deem the delight which is in it as a pause in thy service.
Eor the gift of tears is the accomplishment of prayer.
Do not wonder if sometimes, while thou art kneeling in
prayer, thy mind, being concentrated upon it, desist from
praying. This thou wilt find during service as well as during
recitation. When thy mind is distracted, it will rather adhere
to recitation than to prayer. Thy method of recitation has to
be parallel to the scope of thy discipline. Not all books are
useful for the concentration of the mind. Most books containing
447 instruction are not useful for purification. Various books cause
to thee distraction of mind. Know that not every book con-
taining instruction concerning the fear of God, is also useful

300 GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING KTC.
for the purification of the inner being and the concentration
of the deliberations. Do not dispute about the exact significance
of these things with him that does not know the truth.
Love rest more than labours. Honour recitation, if possible,
more than standing 1); for it is a source of pure prayer. But
there is no reason at all to despise standing. Beware of snares.
Recitation of Psalms is the root of discipline. But know this,
that the sentences [sungj with a distracted mind suit better
bodily labour. Mental grief is better than bodily fatigue. At
the time of weariness be accustomed to spur on thy zeal
somewhat. For the heart greatly needs to be alert to render
fervent the emotions of the soul. As against desire, so natural
warmth is also helpful at the time of weariness ; for it chases
the cold from the soul. Usually weariness befalls us at two
occasions through a heavy stomach and through great weak-
:
ness caused by labours.
The regulation of service is the light of the mind. There
is nothing like knowledge.
Let every prayer which thou offerest during the night, be
honoured in thy eyes above all labours of the day. Do not
make heavy thy stomach, lest thy mind become confused and
thyself troubled by distraction while standing during the night;
and thy limbs be lax and thyself filled wholly with relaxation
;
thy soul be dark and thy impulses troubled, and thyself ab-
solutely unable to concentrate them upon the sentences on
account of darkness and the taste of everything become weak
;
to thee and the sentences of the Psalms sung keep not their
;
sweetness to thee, sentences the discriminations of which the
mind used to taste with delight on account of its swiftness
and illumination.
When the order of the night-service is troubled, then the
mind will also be confused during the service of the day and
proceed in darkness, without taking delight in recitation, as
usually. For it is as if a cloud lies over the impulses, when
they are in emotion in prayer or in meditation. The delight
which during the day is lavished upon the ascetic is poured on
the watchful mind on account of the light of the nightly service.
From him who has not experienced solitude for a long time
thou canst not expect to learn anything additional concerning
i) in prayer or in vigils

1
GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING ETC. 30
the goods of the ascetics even though he may be very wise
and instructive and possess a range of habitual virtues.
Be cautious not to weaken thy body too much, lest wea-
riness overpower thee and thou shouldst make thy soul cold
against the taste of its service. As in a scale man ought to
weigh his discipline. When thou art satisfied, be somewhat
cautious against free speech in thyself.
Let thy sitting be in chastity, also at the time of bodily
want. Especially chaste and cautious thou hast to be when
going to sleep, not only thy deliberations, but also thy mem-
bers being watchful. Be watchful against presumption when
good states *) come upon thee. Thy weakness and thy dullness
449 in the face of its subtlety thou must communicate to our Lord
in zealous prayer, lest evil things should be allowed to try
thee. For fornication follows haughtiness, and aberration pre-
sumption.
Use handiwork as far as thou needest it, especially as thou
art shut up in solitude. Let not thy hope on Him that pro-
vides for thee, indulge in any weakness-, God's provisions in
behalf of His housemates are amazing; even in the desert
without human hands He provides for those who inhabit it
and hope on Him. If our Lord supplies thee with that which
the body needs, though thou doest not labour but carest for
the soul only, then some thought will arise by the trickery
of the murderer 3 ) namely this, that there necessarily must be
on thy part some cause for all this care. And with this deli-
beration, God's care will be withdrawn from thee. And at the
same time myriads of temptations will arise and assail thee,
having their origin either in the neglect of those who used
to care for us, or in the recommencement of pains and illnes-
ses that are caused 3 ) in our body. God does not give up His
care on account of this emotion alone, but when the mind
sticks to it. On account of in voluntary emotion God does
not chastise and judge a man, not even when we give way
to it for a short time •, but at once pain pricks us and con-
trition comes to us. Our Lord will not seek retribution for
such a fault but only for such a one as the mind really
;
clings to, in that we glance at it unconsciously as if there
1) rdfiiliiai-
2) Satan 3) lit. stirring

302 GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING liTC.
were no harm in it and without thinking of anything wrong
Perpetually we have to pray to our Lord in this way : O
45° Christ, Thou summit of truth, let Thy truth dawn in our hearts,
that we know to walk in Thy way according to Thy will.
When for a short time or longer some evil deliberation
shows itself often in thee, know then assuredly that Satan
wishes to lay a snare for thee. And pay attention to it in
due time. If it is however a right-hand and good one, know
that the Lord wishes to give thee some share of life and
that for this cause this deliberation is astir in thee so unusu-
ally often. If it is a dark deliberation and thou art in doubt
concerning it because thou canst not make out clearly whether
it is helpful or treacherously hidden in a scheme of beauty,
then pay attention to it in keen prayer night and day, with
long vigils. Do not push it from thee, neither deliver thyself
unto it but pray diligently and fervently because of it. Do
not cause crying to our Lord, and Me will show himself ma-
nifestly, [so that thou knowest] whence it is.
Love silence above all things. It brings thee near the fruit
which the tongue is too weak to interpret. At first we compel
ourselves to be silent. Then from our silence something is
born which draws us towards silence. May God grant thee to
perceive that which is born from silence. If thou beginnest
with this discipline, I do not know how much light will dawn
in thee through it. Concerning what is said about the admir-
4$i able Arsenius that Fathers and brethren came to see him,
:
but that — he sat with them in silence and dismissed them in
silence do not think, my brother, that this happened by
the action of his will alone, though in the beginning he had
to compel himself. After some time some delight is born in
the heart from the exercise of this service and by force it
draws the body towards remaining in silence.
Many tears are born in us by this discipline, by the amazing
sight of things which the heart perceives distinctly. Sometimes
by suffering, sometimes on account of ecstasy the heart be-
comes small as a child • and as soon as it insists in prayer,
tears will burst forth.
Great is the man who, side by side with bodily endurance,
possesses admirable customs in his soul.
If thou placest all labours of this discipline l on one side
)
l) solitary life

GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING ETC. T>°J
and silence on the other, silence will outweigh them. There
are many warnings of the Fathers which need not be kept
laboriously when a man approaches unto silence, and the
practice of which becomes superfluous, because he is elevated
above them, and is near the mark. Silence is also helpful
for solitude.
For it is impossible that, living- in an inhabited place, we
should not meet with any one. Even that angel of God, Ar-
senius, who loved solitude more than any one, could not
wholly avoid meeting others. For in such a place we meet
Fathers and brethren and innumerable other persons, and we
have to visit the church. When that blessed man saw that it
452 was impossible to avoid this, so long as he was in the vicinity
of an inhabited place (though his dwelling-place was at a
distance of many miles from a human settlement, even from
.
the solitaries who dwelt in those places), he learned from
grace this means: continual silence. When sometimes it was
necessary for him to open his door to some of them, they
enjoyed his aspect only conversation was superfluous.
;
Many fathers have been led by this sight, to become care-
ful also as to their own person that, their spiritual riches might
increase, through the instruction they received from the aspect
of the blessed one. They continually saw him silent, so that
many of them put a stone in their mouth *), others tied a
rope to their inner wall for the sake of recollection, others
wearied themselves by unusual fasting when they had to go
;
to meet other people they imposed the trial of hunger upon
themselves. For hunger greatly helps those who try to acquire
a greater concentration of the senses. And many used to do
such things in order to acquire this self-control of beautiful
aspect that imparts life.
Many fathers I have found, o my brethren, great and admir-
able, who cared for the direction of the senses and the bodily
attitude more than for other labours, because from them is
453 also born the direction of the deliberations. Many causes,
independent of his will, meet a man and make him leave the
domain of his freedom. And if he did not guard his senses
through the regularity of custom which dominated his soul
before, they would for long prevent him from recovering his mind,
finding his former quiet.
l) Ghazuli tells this about Abu Bukr

304 GOOD ADVICE GTVLXG INSTRUCTIONS CONOKKNING ETC.
The education of the heart is, to be occupied with its hope.
The education of discipline is to free oneself from every thing.
The recollection of death is a wholesome bond of the outward
limbs. A hook [drawing] the soul towards life is the joy that
A
rises in the heart on account of hope. drink of knowledge
are the perpetual temptations which the mind every day draws
from within, through the two varying states. The budding of
the heart is the conviction of the resurrection in faith, which
hope receives from within.
Deem me worthy, my Lord, to see in my soul Thy bounty,
before I depart this would, that I may perceive in my self
in that hour consolation, as have done those who in good
hope have left this world. Open my heart, o God, through
Thy grace and purify me from- the communion with sin and
;
make level in my heart the way of repentance, my God and
my Lord, my hope and my boast, my strong refuge, by
whom my eyes receive light, and let me receive understanding
by Thy truth.
Deem me worthy, O my Lord, to taste the delightful gift
of repentance by which the soul is made free from the bondage
of sin and the whole will of flesh and blood.
Deem me worthy, o Lord, to taste this affection in which
reposes the gift of pure prayer. My saviour has reached the
amazing passage through which the soul leaves the visible
454 world and in which begin new impulses for entry into the
spiritual world, and experiences of new apperceptions.
He that begins and accomplishes well, places his discipline
upon this foundation, entreating God unceasingly that He may
deem him worthy to perceive this apperception in which is
sown the knowledge of the future order of things through
imperishable hope, which through divine grace is preserved
for man after the completion of this world.
But he that begins pervertedly goes from above downwards:
he begins with joy and he ends with weeping; and he becomes
devoid of knowledge and hope, as a formless body which not
attained to the reception of the soul, because it has not com-
pleted the state of preparation in the womb, but has reached
the end of the life of form l ).
Contempt for intercourse with the world is the sign of a
1) K&CVASaX—.l KllLu

GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING ETC. 305
soul that has perceived its hope. A hidden alertness implies
drowsiness regarding visible tilings.
The weapon of the heart is faith in Christ. Who by the
desire of hope has withstood even death, death is esteemed
as nothing in his eyes, and so are being exiled from his country,
and the strife of the demons and alienation from men, and
lack of the consolation of the world. What is the consolation
of visible things and the being occupated with them, as com-
pared with the delight of hope that is perceived in the heart?
As he that has abandoned the body in the drunkenness of his
joy, through the flaming faith which kindles his heart, so that
455 all visible things are hidden from him and he knows nothing
in the creation through the heat of his body and the emotions
of his soul, and as he that abides already in the kingdom, does
he account [earthly things] because of the faith of his mind.
I hough s — ometimes we are subject to despondency becau — se
of loneliness perhaps this is permitted in us by Providence
yet we also possess through our heart's faith the consolation
of hope which is too great for words; and through this hope,
troubles are accounted by us as nothing, even death. And
well has one of those who are clad with God, said Sufficient
:
is the love of God, as a consolation for him that believes,
even when he loses his self. How should troubles injure him
who despises even the delights of comfort for the sake of
future good?
Also this I advise thee, o my brother, that in all thy dis-
cipline the scale of mercy be preponderant; through this thou
wilt perceive God's mercy for the world. Our own state be-
comes to us a mirror in which we behold the true Prototype,
in those things which naturally belong to that Essence.
By these things and the like we become illuminated so as
to be in motion unto God, with a clear mind. A heart wicked
from of old, cannot become serene.
A merciful man is the physician of his own soul; for he
drives away from his inner being the dark mist, as by a
strong wind. Mercy is a good investment with God, according
456 to the Gospel of life : Blessed is the merciful : for he shall
obtain mercy J ). Not only in the world to be, symbolically also
here. What mercy is greater than this, that when a man is
1) Matthew 5,7
Vurh. Aid. Letter!;. 192-' (Wcnsinck)

306 good advice giving instructions concerning etc.
moved by mercy unto his follow man and becomes his partner
in suffering, our Lord delivers his soul from gloomy darkness
which is intelligible Hell, and brings it in contact with the
light of life, for its comfort? The blessed Euagrius has well
said A clear way is founded upon mercy.
:
Therefore, as I have said : Let a merciful heart preside
over thy whole behaviour, then thou shalt find peace with God.
Be careful, that no evil be ever done to any man through thy
hands, not even to the evil one 1). And when it is possible for
thee to deliver the iniquitous from evil, do not omit it. Not
that, if the matter be far f — rom thee, thou shouldst go and mix
thyself wit — h such things such a deed does not belong to
thy duty but if the matter is put in thy hands, and thou
hast power over it, because it has been placed before thee
accidentally as a trial, in that God wished to try thee by His
admitting it, then be cautious regarding thyself lest thou be-
come a participant in the blood of the iniquious, because thou
doest not hasten to deliver him. But try with thy whole soul
to save him, even if thou shouldst die for his sake. Then
thou wilt really be a martyr and as one that has suffered
death on the cross for sinners. And pray God, that this2 may
)
not happen through thee. But even if he be worthy of evil,
let him receive the judgment of his deeds by the hands of
457 others. It does not become thee to regard the worth of his
deeds. Let good [alone] happen to him by thy hands.
Think of Him who bears all, the deeds of all men being
placed before His eyes, clearer than the sun and if He liked
;
He could destroy all men by the breath of His mouth. Thou
wert not appointed to pronounce [the judgment of vengeance
j
against deeds and their perpetrators, but it is thy duty to
implore mercy on the world, to abide in vigil for the salva-
tion of all, to share in the suffering of every man, righteous
and sinners. And thou must know, that if he deserve it, justice
will bind him within a short time, by the hands of others who
are fit for this deed ; and thou wilt save thy soul and become
a living martyr. But even this thou hast not to ask or to
care for, but to implore God's mercy upon him, that he may
change and become as it is the will of God that he should
i) Cf., p. 14, 79 etc.
2) viz.. the punishment of the iniquitous

:
GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTION'S CONCERNING ETC. 3O/
be and may depart life in righteousness and not [awaiting]
the retribution of wickedness.
Be instead of an avenger, a deliverer instead of an accuser,
;
a peace maker; instead of one who delivers, a martyr; instead
of a plaintiff, a dependant. Beseech God in behalf of the sin-
ners, that they may obtain grace. And pray for the righteous,
that they may be preserved. Vanquish the evil ones by this
kindness, and make the zealous wonder at thy bounty. Those
who love justice, make them ashamed by thy mercy. With the
afflicted be afflicted in thy mind. Love all men. And be far
458 from all men. Recollect death, and prepare thyself for thy
entrance into it. Embellish thy course. Remember that the sins
of all men go before them to the court of justice.
Be not dejected because of trespasses. I do not say that
thou shouldst not suffer but thou must not account them as
;
being incurable. Better broken than dead. For one who is
broken, there is the physician, who on the cross has implored
mercy for those who crucified Him, who asked forgiveness for
His murderers while He hung on the cross. ,All manner of sin
and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men' ] namely on ac-
),
count of repentance. When Simon who had denied Him, had
wept a short time, He forgave him. And after 1 lis resurrec-
tion, He appointed him as the head of His flock. Three times
He asked him : Lovest thou me ? 2 ), even as three times he
had denied Him, in order to confirm His pardon. Christ came
on behalf of the sinners, in order to heal the broken in heart,
and to bind up their wounds :i). 'The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me; therefore He has anointed me, to preach good
tidings unto the meek He hath sent me to bind up the
;
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives'*), and sight
to the blind, and healing to those who are broken, by for-
giveness. And the Apostle says in his epistle Jesus Christ
:
came to the world to save sinners"'). And his Lord witnesses
For I am not come to call the righteous ; for they that are
whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick").
There were two debtors to a certain creditor; and because
they had nothing to pay with, he forgave both of them; na-
mely when they had beseeched him.
:
i) Matthew 12,31 2) John 21, 16 3) cf. Psalm 147,3
-4)-Isaiah—6-f,-I „ 5) I Timothy I, 15 6) Mark 2,17

308 GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING ETC.
Our frail nature would not be strong enough if God's justice
459 should proceed to take vengeance. Therefore He uses mercy
so that we at all times are bound by our debt.
Do not sin, o man, in hope of repentance, and do not indulge
in weakness, confiding in forgiveness. Remember, that death
will not be postponed. Do not contrive to approach to the
delight of sin, with a cunning mind. God is not mocked a ).
His knowledge precedes thy deliberation trouble will come
:
upon thee suddenly, and thou wilt cry, but He will not
answer thee.
When thou approachest thy bed, because the time for sleep
has come, say: O bed, perhaps thou wilt become my grave
this night and I not know it. Perhaps in stead of temporary
sleep, eternal sleep will fall on me this night, while I thought
of preparing for days and months, which I did not see.
As long as thou hast feet, run after the service of righte-
ousness, before they be caught by a bond which it is impos-
sible to sever. As long as thou hast hands, stretch them
towards heaven in prayer, before thy arms fall from their
joints and thou desire to raise them, and it is impossible for
thee. As long as thou hast fingers, raise them unto God in
supplication. For there will come a time when the splendid
strength of their joints is weakened. As long as thou hast
eyes, fill them with tears during prayer, weeping for thy sins,
460 before the moment when sand will cover the black [clothes]
and the eyes will become feeble, staring senseless in one direc-
tion, without thy knowing it. As long as the heart, the fountain
of the deliberations, is ordered by a distinguishing power, be-
think of those things which are helpful to thy life, before the
soul be hastened on to departure from it -) and become a
house devoid of its inhabitants.
O thou who art wise, let no deliberation flatter thee with
the hope of a long life. As a flower withers by the blowing
of the sirocco, so against thee will blow one of the elements
which are within thee and without thy expecting it, suddenly
thy knees will relax. And while thou thinkest that it is nothing
and that thou art curing the illness, suddenly the cunning one
will approach, who laughs at the wise.
1) Galatians 6, 7
2) the heart

GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING ETC. 309
O, for the wretchedness of our nature! how are we entangled
in its love, though God does not desire to leave us in this
state. Set thy heart to prepare for departure, o man. As a
sage thou must expect departure every hour, thinking every
day: the messenger of him that comes after me, has reached
the gate; why should I remain sitting? It is a departure for
ever, I cannot return hither. Go asleep with these thoughts
every night and meditate upon this deliberation every day.
;
And when [the time of departure] comes, go joyfully to meet
it, saying: Come in peace. I knew that thou wouldst come
and I have not neglected anything that could serve me on
the way.
461 Take provisions for thy long way, o sage. Drive away
the heaviness of sleep from thy heart, o companion. Order
thy things for departure, thou who dwellest as a sedentary.
Morningtime is near, o traveller, why art thou sleeping? Come,
prepare thyself, thou sailor who art about to sail off, prepare
the utensils of thy ship for thou doest not know when the
;
wind will begin to blow.
Be ready and prepared before he comes that will destroy
thy forms. For Sheol shall make wither their form 1 ), and they
shall be bereft of the beautiful glory of nature and their bodies
will be left in the wilderness. Remember always that destruction
of deplorable appearance, that formless scattering of thy senses,
that ruin of the building of thy body, that pure mixture that
will become mud in Sheol. Bleased is he that with joy meets
the recollection of that destruction ! Blessed is he that with
good hope awaits that event full of mystery, in which the
wonder of the Creator's great power is hidden ! Spiritual me-
ditation is, to be continually occupied with the hope of [things
which will be] after the resurrection.
The beginning of this impulse in the mind lies in the domain
of repentance. That which induces the soul to embrace repen-
tance, is the constant thought of future things. Who has been
moved by repentance, his hope has turned to the future world.
Who has forgotten this, his mind abides in this world.
Who Who
loves intercourse with Christ, loves to be alone.
loves to remain in the company of many others, he is a friend
of this world.
i)-Cf. JabT47^<K Thou changest his countenance and sendest him away.

3IO GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING KTC.
462 Repentance ] ) is the constant sorrow of the heart at the
meditation of that inexplicable statute: how shall I reach that
unspeakable entrance? If thou lovest repentance, then love also
solitude. For without this, repentance cannot be completed.
If there is any one who disputes this, do not dispute with him,
for he does not know what he says. If he did know what
repentance is, he also would know its place, and that it is not
to be disturbed by trouble. If thou lovest solitude, the father
of repentance, then love also to accept gladly the small de-
ficiencies of the body, and the blame that arises from them.
Without this preparation it will be impossible for thee to live
in solitude, freely, without trouble. Ifthou despisest those things,
thou wilt acquire solitude, according to God's will. If thou art
wronged or robbed or laughed at or the like, thou wilt not
be moved, because of thy love of solitude.
Love of solitude is the constant expectation of death. He
that without this meditation enters solitude, having other thoughts,
cannot bear those things which, for the sake of solitude, he
must bear from all sides to die for the sake of God, and to
:
live in God. The accomplishment of life is meditation upon
death for the sake of God. This brings our mind near to union
with God, says Euagrius.
Also this thou must know o discrimiating reader that
, ,
lonely dwelling and solitude and reclusion are not chosen by
us in order to perform an excellent canonical labour. For it
4^3 is known that communion with many others gives a better
opportunity, because the body preserves its strength better. But
if reclusion were not necessary, the pious men that were the
holy Fathers, would not have abandoned intercourse with many
people. Some of them dwelt in graves, others chose reclusion
in a lonely cell, which is greatly relaxing to the body and
which does not promote the accomplishment of the canonical
rules. And all bodily weakness and misery, and severe illnesses
which struck them, they bore gladly during their whole life,
even when they were not able to stand on their feet or to
offer the usual prayer, or to praise God with their mouth, or
to recite a psalm, or to perform any of the [works] which
are performed through the body. And bodily weakness alone
and solitude with them took the place of all canonical rules.
l) Cf. Introduction

GOOD ADVICE GIVING INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING ETC. 3II
And this was their occupation all the days of their life. And
during all this so called idleness, none of them longed to leave
his cell or to wander abroad ceasing from canonical labours,
or to enjoy the sound of the glorifications of others in a
congregation.
Better is he that perceives his sins, than he that is profit-
able to the world by his appearance. Better is he that one
time has sighed by himself, than he that quickens the dead
by his prayer and dwells among many others. Better is he
that has been deemed worthy of seeing himself, than he that
has been deemed worthy of seeing the angels. The latter
464 partakes of the eyes of the body, the former of the eye of
the soul. Better is he that clings to Christ mournfully in soli-
tude, than he that praises Him in a congregation. No one
should adduce the words of Paul : For I could wish that myself
were accursed by Christ for my brethren l He that has
).
received the power of Paid, he has also the permission to
do so. Paul was behaving as he did because a divine order
had been given to him to be profitable to the world. As he
witnesses to it, that he did not this by his own will : for
necessity is laid upon me, woe is unto me, if I preach not
the gospel ~). Moreover, the election of Paul was not because
of repentance, but that he should preach to humanity he
received even greater power.
So we must love solitude, o my brother, that this world
may die from our heart and we may think of death continu-
ally. And by this meditation we shall approach unto God in
heart; and we shall despise the emptiness of the world; and
its desires shall be despicable in our eyes. Let us joyfully bear,
with a sorry body, the continual idleness of solitude, my brother,
in order that we may be deemed worthy of delight with those
that in the caverns and the clefts of the earth are waiting for
the glorious revelation of our Lord from heaven. To Him and
to His father and to the Holy Ghost be glory and praise
for ever and ever.
1) Romans 9,3 2) Romans 9,16

I 2 A LETTER WHICH HE SENT TO HIS FRIEND ETC
LXVI
465 A LETTER WHICH HE SENT TO HIS FRIEND IN
WHICH HE EXPOUNDS SOME THINGS CONCERNING
THE MYSTERY OF SOLITUDE AND HOW IT IS THAT
MANY NEGLECT THIS WONDERFUL SERVICE BE-
CAUSE THEY ARE NOT ACQUAINTED WITH IT
WHEREAS THE MAIN PART OF THEM CLING TO
SITTING IN THE CELL BECAUSE THIS IS CURRENT
MONKISH TRADITION. TOGETHER WITH A COLLEC-
TION OF SHORT SAYINGS USEFUL FOR THOSE WHO
PRACTISE SOLITUDE
Now that thou hast inculcated in me the duty to write to
thee on those things which are necessary, I inform thy love
by this my writing, in accordance with the promise which I
gave thee. As I have found that thou art determined to prac-
tise sitting in solitude, with painstaking behaviour, so I from
my
side will describe to thee in simple words, that which I
have heard from discriminating men concerning this service,
combining the concentrated sense of their words with personal1
)
experiences gathered] by practice. And thou on thy side,
,
|
wilt profit by being occupied with this letter in thy usual
diligent way, because with the discrimination of wisdom thou
approachest the concise terms of the lecture of this letter,
and not in the usual groove. And thou shalt take them as
some elucidation of the rest of thy lecture, because of the
great insight and power hidden in them. For the mind is
greatly strengthened by such a lecture and it takes from it a
466 weapon against distraction of the thoughts and against dejec-
tion which is wont to rise from the hardship of labours and
the prolonged sitting in solitude. And it casts behind it the
world with attention to its practices, through the radiancy
with which it is clad [by the sight of] those things which it
meets ; the which is the aim of this letter, [namely to make
known] what is dwelling and service in solitude, and what
mysteries are hidden in this discipline which are not observed
1) lit.: near

A LETTER WHICH HE SENT TO HIS FRIEND ETC. 3|3
by many, and what events the prudent try to reach by soli-
tude; and wherefore they reject the righteousness which is
practised among men, fleeing from the sight of the world and
choosing the troubles and struggles which are connected with
quiet and lonely dwelling. On account of this insight and on
account of those things which are found in this letter [readers]
will call these solitaries who pass their life in this world in
concentrated sitting by themselves happy. To those who do
not perceive these things, admonition and advice, concerning
the order of solitude are vain. Here however I write to the
wise, and I give advice in love.
If thou seekest imperishable life during thy short clays, o
brother, then let thy entry unto solitude take place with dis-
crimination T ), that thou mayest find the profit which awaits
the wise in the path of solitude. Scrutinize its service and do
not run after a name. Enter, be profound and bold, learn and
acquire and train thyself in all the amazing and liberating
distinctions of the ways of service in solitude. Then thou wilt
understand, with all the saints, what is the height and the
467 depth and the length and the breadth of this illimitable dis-
cipline, because of the illimitable riches which its merchants
seek to acquire. And thou wilt not rest, until thou art trained
in all the ways of its service 2
).
I'rom every human practice, at its beginning, some profit is
expected when it shall be realised; this it is which moves the
intelligent to lay its foundations. And this aim makes the mind
heroic, so as to bear the difficulties of the matter. The mind
even gathers some consolation from it by looking towards it.
And
after the fashion of an officer of the law, it apprehends
the mind, till the matter is accomplished. So, in the eyes of
the discriminate, the aim of the severe service of solitude is
the harbour of mysteries towards which the mind looks, from
the time when it lays the first foundations till the end of the
work of building. And as the eyes of the helmsman look to
the stars, so, in all his long and difficult labours, the inner
gaze of the solitary, during his whole course, is directed
towards the aim which he has fixed in his mind the first day
when he gave himself to sailing the rough sea of solitude,
till he shall find the pearl for the sake of which he has
1) Cf. The Book of the Dove, p. 19 2) Text has plural

314 A LETTER WHICH HE SENT TO HIS FRIEND ETC.
entrusted himself to the not-to-be-explored floods of the ocean.
And his gaze of hope makes light to him the whole burden
of service and the difficulties full of danger which meet him
in his course.
But he that, as soon as he enters solitude, docs not set this
aim to the profit [he wishes to gather] from his service, labouring
at random as a man that combates the air, will never during
468 his life escape the spirit of despondency. And one oftwo things
will happen to him Either, no longer bearing the insupportable
:
burden, he will be vanquished and give up solitude altogether;
or, if he adheres to it, his cell becomes a dungeon in which
he is tormented. And because he does not know that he may
expect the consolation which is born from the service in solitude,
he is not able to implore through his heart's pain or to beseech
in passionate prayer or to embrace the token which our merciful
Fathers, from love of their posterity, have left to us in their
writings, whereby we could gain our life.
One of them has said : To me the profit of solitude is this,
that where I withdraw from the camp in which my abode is
fixed, my mind becomes void of the occupations of war and
turns to a service which is more profitable.
Another Solitude cuts off causes which give a new turn to
:
the deliberations and within its walls there grow old and taste-
less the recollections of previous things. And when the old
matter has disappeared from the intellect, the mind returns to
nature in order to direct it.
Another : I run to meet solitude, with this aim, that in my
heart the sentences of recitation and prayer may become sweet.
And when my tongue has been made silent by the delight of
their understanding, I fall, as it were, asleep, my senses and
my emotion being benumbed. And when by prolonged solitude
my heart has acquired peace from the trouble of recollections,
solitude sends me continually waves of gladness which arise
from emotions which burst forth from within unexpectedly and
469 suddenly , to the delight of my heart; the which, running
against the ship of my soul, and [withdrawing it] from the
sounds of the world and from the life of the flesh, immerse
it in the deepest depths of quiet in God.
Another: The degree of thy hidden things thou canst under-
stand by thy different emotions. 1 mean the perpetual ones,
not those which are set astir by accident and are made to

A LETTER WHICH HE SENT TO HIS FRIEND ETC 3I5
pass by time. There is no one clad with flesh whose house
is not visited by some traveller belonging- to the two various
states of good and of evil. If he is disprudent, by those of
deficiency, through nature, the fathers of children. If he is
faithful, by those of elevation, through the leaven of grace
which He has mixed with our nature, the parents of the king-
dom on high.
Another Choose the delightful service of continual vigils,
:
by which all the Fathers have put off their old man and have
become worthy of the renewal of the intellect. At these times
the soul perceives that immortal life, by which apperception
it throws off the garment of darkness and becomes the recipient
of spiritual gifts.
Another: It is not possible that a man, while seeing many
faces and hearing various sounds foreign to spiritual medita-
tion, and speaking and having intercourse with the like, should
keep his mind free so as to gaze at himself secretly, to
remember his sins, to hide his thoughts, and to look at those
which come, and to become familiar with hidden prayer.
470 Further it is impossible for a man to subdue the senses by
the domination of the soul without solitude and alienation from
men because the initiated soul becomes united to them and
involved with them as in one person and is dragged along
with their impulses, if it does not hold vigil with hidden prayer.
And then, how vigils and alertness with prayer and recitation,
will delight and gladden and give joy and make pure the soul,
is well known to those who have practised these things during
their whole life, in veracious asceticism.
And thou, o man who lovest solitude, place before thee, as
a mark, these indications based upon the words of the Fathers,
and direct the course of thy service towards them, and before
all things, judge which are those which suit best the aim of
thy service. Without them thou canst not be mature in true
knowledge; try to show thy endurance especially in them.
Silence is a symbol of the future world. Speech is an organ
of this world. A man who fasts is trying to acquire likeness
with the nature of the spiritual beings.
Through his continual silence and fasting a man becomes
distinguished that in his hidden state is constantly occupied with
the service of God. By these mysteries is accomplished, even
through those invisible forces, the holy service of the Essence

316 A LETTER WHICH [IK SENT TO HIS FRIEND ETC.
which governs the world. Some men who have been marked
471 off to enter the divine mysteries, have been signed with such
seals as these some of them have been entrusted with the
;
guidance of a strong people; others have even acquired power
over the elements and, midst great admiration, the species *)
of nature have obeyed their commandments others have been
;
entrusted with the office of examining, for the universal re
novation, the secrets that were hidden in the mysterious silence
of the Lord of the universe. And it would not have been
beautiful, if with a full belly and a mind distracted by wantonness,
such mysteries had been administered, or if the sanits had
ventured to elevate themselves to intercourse with God and
unto His secret mysteries, unless with weak limbs and a colour
livid by the pain of hunger, and a mind conscious of its reason
by its having renunciated all earthly deliberations.
When, on account of a long abode in thycell and troublesome
labours and secret observance and restraint of the senses from
all contact, the. power of solitude gets hold of thee, thou wilt
find first that joy which from time to time, without a cause,
dominates thy soul. Then thy eyes are opened to see God's
creative power and the beauty of the creatures, in accordance
with the degree of thy purity. And when the mind by this
sight has been snatched up in ecstasy, night and day become
one to it in its admiration of the glorious works of God. And
then the apperception of the affections is taken away from the
soul by the delight of this sight. And by it the soul enters
472 the two degrees of intelligible revelations which belong to what
lies higher than purity.
LXVII
AN ELUCIDATION WITH EXAMPLES CONCERNING
THE DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN INTELLIGIBLE THINGS
[SHOWING| WHICH USE THERE IS IN EACH OE THEM
Intellect 2 ) is a spiritual sense which is made a recipient of
the visual power, as the pupil of the fleshly eyes into which
perceptible light is poured.
K'l'iX 2) rt^.lSXI

,:
AN ELUCIDATION WITH EXAMPLES CONCERNING ETC. 3IJ
Intelligible sight is natural knowledge which by power has
been mixed with the order of nature, and which is called
natural light.
A holy power is grace, the sun of distinction for those things,
which hold a middle position between light and sight. Species1
)
are those things which are intermediary and distinguished by
light so as to become sight. The affections are as it were
some dense entities, which, placed between light and sight,
hinder the distinction of things.
Purity is the clearness of the intelligible air, through the
mediation 2 ) of which spiritual nature circulates in us.
The reverse way : If the intellect is not of a sound nature,
knowledge does not influence it. If the fleshly sense is harmed
by some cause, sight is taken from it. If the intellect is sound,
but there is no knowledge, the intellect cannot have any
distinct influence upon spiritual things without it; just as an
eye which is sound in all those things which are its own
473 and yet, often its visual power is dull. So, if all these [spiri-
tual] things are preserved in their proper state, but grace is
not near, they remain, all of them, destitute of the service of
their different functions; as it is also during nighttime, when
all these things, because of the absence of the sun, remain
without function, though they are true and perfect in them-
selves. I mean eye, sight and things, not those which are
distinguishing or distinguished. This is what has been said
In Thy light we see light ''). Now, even when grace, the in-
telligible sun, is near and inciting and flattering and working
and exhortating, but there is no purity through which (as
through the air purified from the density of the clouds and
from the matter of darkness) the sunrays attain to us easily,
so th — at we enjoy by their light a sight which is wholly spiri-
tual then sight is impeded in its discriminating power, nature
looses its active force, the soul is hindered from perceiving
the second sun which dawns over the world, because of the
screen of the body in which the rays of truth are hidden so
that they cannot reach us.
Therefore, all that has been said is strictly necessary. And
because all these things are hardly to be found without defi-
i) r^-liSi 2) lit. bosom
3) I's. 36,9

I 8 AN ELUCIDATION WITH EXAMPLES CONCERNING ETC.
ciency any one not many are found who reach a partial
, .
completeness in spiritual knowledge. Such a deficiency has its
origin in impotence of the intellect, or in neglect of the aim,
474 or in the unpreparcdness of the will, or in lack of purity, or
in want of guides, or in the impediments of grace (for riches
do not —suit the fool, nor is a slave entitled to rule over many
things) or in the hindrances of time, place and mode.
LXVJII
SHORT SECTIONS
You must know, my brethren, that the sensual eye through
its visual power alone (which is administered unto it from the
brains as it were through a channel), without partaking of
other light, is not able to receive [the images] of the different
things. All natural apperceptions are placed on the same level
as the intelligible things as regards spiritual behaviour in this
respect and [as for] the natural force of the intellect, which
; —
is also called psychic knowledge it is impossible for the
soul to participate in truth by contemplation, without receiving
divine light. This is based upon excellence of behaviour, which
is acquired when the affectible part of the soul is built upon
natural health. For many have endeavoured [to acquire this]
while being entangled in psychic and bodily affections, by phi-
losophical training, being supported by the latter alone but
;
they have lost even the truth which they possessed and have
ruined their usual visual power. And just as eyes which see
in the air fantastic images because of their weak sight which
cannot reach the humid matter in them, so every one of them
475 considers as truth one image which presents itself to him.
And when all the images of all of them are united, then, in
stead of one truth, there appears a variety of images. And
this happens to them because they have not asked for the
rays of grace which shines so as to purify the soul. Truth is
the apperception concerning God which a man personally tastes
by the perceptive power of the spiritual senses of the mind.
The flower of spiritual knowledge is divine love, which has
its origin in radiant insights which are found by the spirit
during prayer. Love is the fruit of prayer, which, on account

;
SHORT SKCTTONS 3I9
of contemplation orioqnatincr in it, draws the mincl towards a
predilection which never becomes satisfied the mind clings to
•,
this predilection for prayer without growing dejected, be it
that it prays apperceptibly, with the body, or by the silent
motion of the mincl, fervently and eagerly. Prayer is: the im-
pulses of the will being dead regarding fleshly life. For it is
alike when a man prays veraciously and when he dies from
the world this means that he denies himself, and this means
;
continually being in prayer.
It is known to those who know the scriptures what beseeching
in veracious prayer is. And it is known that those who have
devoted themselves to this lonely state in order to acquire
lonely prayer through their demands, thwarting their desire,
do not follow their nature when they arouse trouble against
their soul because of the contrary affections which they stir
476 in their soul after prayer.
So the love of God is found in selfdenial. As from the
seeds of the sweat of fasting the blade of chastity grows
up, so does lasciviousness grow up from satiety and impudence
from repletion. Against a hungry stomach wanton deliberations
never direct themselves. Every food which we receive within
us is added to the humours of the natural seed which is col-
lected in our body. And when the organic limbs are filled
with the influx which is gathered there from the whole body,
and when it happens that the bodily [eye| sees [something],
or when some involuntary recollection is awakened in the
heart, then at once, together with the thought a sensation of
delight is astir and spreads through the whole body, so that,
even if the mind is very strong and chaste and cautious in
its emotions, still, by this apperception of the limbs, the dis-
criminating power of the mincl is troubled at once, and is, as
it were, cast down from the height where it stood, and the
holiness of its deliberations is perverted.
And its pure chastity is defiled by the confusion which is
caused by the affection that is astir in the heart on account
of the burning of the limbs; and at once half of its force is
lost, so to say, and the former scope of its hope is forgotten
and though it has not entered into the struggle, it is defeated
without strife or labour on the part of its fiend, and van-
quished by the subduing will of the body.
477 To such an extent does copious food and constant satiety

320 SHORT SECTIONS
compel a man's good will that, although he is moving steadily
in the harbour of chastity, he stoops to comply with that
which he never would have stooped to think of. And when
he lies down to sleep, alone, a host of thoughts clad in im-
pudent images surrounds him. And his chaste bed is made
by them a theatre and a brothel, where he deals and speaks
with his thoughts in drunkenness and defiles his holy limbs,
though no woman is near to him.
What sea is so disturbed by storms as the steady mind is
stirred by the vehemence of the waves assailing it in the sea
of the body, through a full stomach? O chastity, how is
thy beauty made splendid by sleeping on the ground, by the
suffering of hunger, when sleep flies from thee on account of
the leanness of the body and the emptiness of the stomach,
which is made a deep pit for the intestines between the ribs
by abstinence from food. But by indulgence in food and com-
fort, evil representations and impure images are formed and
come into existence. Then they proceed and show themselves
to us in the hidden place of our mind, inciting us to mingle
with them secretly by impudent actions.
Emptiness of the stomach makes free room for the mind
which is devoid of deliberations and all tumult of thoughts.
But when the stomach is replenished and satisfied it is made
thereby a place of sights and a theatre, even if we are in
478 the wilderness and alone. For he that is satisfied desires
many things.
Thou understandest that thou hast been deemed worthy of
psychic apath — y therein not, that no evil deliberations pass
through thee that is [the absence of] the movement of t—he
impulses which are in the body, the which is impossible
nor that thou vanquishest them easily, the thought not having
been defiled or disturbed at all, however exalted this may be;
but that, through the intellect being totally occupied, the mind
is not even permitted to combat with or to crush them , but
that as soon as deliberations elevate their head, it is dragged
away from them by some involuntary force, which by custom
or grace, begins to ferment in the heart which is the house of
the intellect. The struggling mind is different from the rank
of priesthood. The mind which, by heavenly mercy, is dead
to the world, to it things cause simple deliberations only,
without the strife of battle, though from the motion of the

9
SHORT SECTIONS 3^1
limbs an apperceptive power without equal |is born|. Perfection
which is joined with flesh and blood rules over that which
originates in flesh and blood, but it does not annihilate the
peculiarities of nature while vital impulses still move in elemen-
tary life, and the foundation of existence, on account of the
four humours, is subject to various emotions.
LXIX
HOW THE INTELLIGENT HAVE TO DWELL IN
479
SOLITUDE
Listen, my beloved, to what our love says to thee.
If thou desirest that thy labours shall not be empty and thy
days idle and thyself destitute of the profit which the intelli-
gent expect from the discipline of quiet, let then thy entering
into solitude take place with discrimination, not in a kind of
groove, as it is with many. But let there be an aim towards
which thy mind directs the labours of its behaviour1). And in-
terrogate those who have solid knowledge, through experience,
not through reading only. And exercise thyself in all the won-
derful and liberal distinctions of solitude, without taking rest
before thou art trained in all the ways of its service. And at
every step thou takest, examine whether thou art walking in
the way, or thou hast erred away from it on one of the ways
leading to the desert.
Thou must not believe that the true discipline of solitude
is accomplished by visible labours alone. If thou desirest to
reach by personal experience that which our Lathers have found,
thou must secretly have signs and tokens in thy soul, at every
step thou takest, by which thou canst recognise the truth ofour
Lathers or the error of Satan. A few of them, written in order
that thou mayest become wise in thy way are as follows.
4So When thou seest, in solitude, that thy mind is able to use
freely its righthand impulses and that there is no compulsion
in its rule over any of them, then know that thy solitude is
right. And if, while thou art performing thy service with dis-
crimination, without distraction as much as possible, the words
are suddenly cut off from thy mouth, and the bonds of com-
i) ln>i>k of the Dove^ p. 1
Verh. Afd. I.ctterk. 1922 (\Vcn.sini:k).

322 HOW THE INTICLLTGKMT IIAVK TO DWKLL IN SOLITUDK
pulsory silence are placed on thy soul and this phenomenon
is constantly repeated, then know that thou art making pro-
gress in thy solitude and that its simple beginnings are taking-
increase.
For simple solitude is rejected by justice. And every simple
[act ofj discipline, among discriminate sages is accounted as a
lonely, helpless member.
And if thou seest that at every deliberation which stirs in
thy soul, at every recollection and vision happening during
solitude, the surroundings of thy eyes are filled with tears and
thy cheeks are moistened by them, without compulsion, then
know that before thee, in the opposing camp, there begins to
grow a breach.
And if thou findest that thy spirit, from time to time, descends
within them without unusual efforts, and abides there some
time, whatever that time be and afterwards thou seest thy
members as it were in great weakness, while peace reigns over
all thy deliberations, but [the weakness] remains continually
the same, then know that the cloud has begun to cover the
tabernacle.
If, during" thy abiding in solitude, thou findest that harshdelibe-
481 rations reign over thy soul, and that it is tyrannised by them
every moment, and that at all times the mind is attracted by
those things which were administer — ed before, namely, when it
is desirous of vain investigations then know that thou art
fatiguing" thyself with solitude in vain and that thy soul is cor-
rupted by distraction, and that there are outward causes, or
inward neglect of duties, especially of vigils and recitation.
Then direct and fix thy will. But if thou doest not find peace
from the assaults of the affections as soon as these days begin,
then be not astonished.
Now '), if the bosom of the earth when the sunrays have
ceased, preserves their heat for a long time, and if an aromatic
smell and the odour of perfumes which spread through the
air, remain a long time before they are dissipated and become
—
effaced • how much more certain is it, that the affections, like
dogs accustomed to lap up blood at the butcher's, will stand
at the door barking, when the usual food is withheld from
them, till their old force has abated.
l) Introduction

MOW TIIK INTELLIGENT HAVE TO DWELL IN SOLITUDE 323
When neglect begins to penetrate into thy soul secretly and
to spread gloom, and the house is near to being filled with
darkness, then thou wilt secretly perceive in thyselfthese signs
which will soon appear Thy faith will be weakened. Visible
:
things will arouse thy covetousness. Thy confidence will diminish.
Thy neighbour thou wilt wrong. And thy whole person, thy
month and thy heart, will be full of vituperation against every
482 man and thing and against that which thy deliberations and
senses meet, and even against the most High. And thou wilt
be terrified by the frailty of the body which has rendered thee
pusillanimous at all times. And from time to time thy soul
will be shaken by fear, so that thou shalt be frightened and
terrorised as it were by thy shadow7.
For by faith I do not understand that which is the foundation
of the common confession, but the intelligible force that by
the light of the mind supports the heart, and by imvard
testimony stirs in the soul great confidence in God ; so that
the soul does not provide for itself, but casts all its cares on
the Lord without thinking of any of them.
Then, when thou art making intelligible progress, thou wilt
soon perceive in thy soul these dim signs. By hope thou shalt
become strong, and by prayer rich. And continually abundant
profit will be the part of thy mind in all that thou meetest,
and thou wilt perceive the weakness of human nature. On the
one hand thou must beware of haughtiness on the other hand
;
let injury against thy neighbour be despicable in thy eyes.
Departing the body has become desirable to thee because
of the desire to be near those things in which we are going
to live. And as for all the afflicting accidents which happen
to thee manifestly and secretly thou wilt soon find that all of
them happen to thee justly, in all sincerity which is far from
4S3 presumption. And concerning all these thou shalt make con-
fession.
These are signs for the watchful and for those who constantly
dwell in solitude and wish to reach veraciousness of behaviour.
Those who are relaxed, do not want subtle signs indicating hidden
traps. For they arc also far from hidden virtues.
As soon as one of these begins to show itself in thy soul,
then at once try to understand towards which side it begins
to incline then thou shalt know at the same time to which
;
category it belongs.

324 THAT WE CAN UNDERSTAND THE DEGREE ETC.
LXX
THAT WE CAN UNDERSTAND THE DEGREE OF OUR
BEHAVIOUR BY THE VARYING STATES OF OUR MIND
WITHOUT CHILDISHLY JUDGING BY THE MANY
DISTINCTIONS OF OUR LABOURS ONLY THAT WE
SHOULD RECOGNISE THE DEGREE OF OUR SOUL AS
SAGES BY THE JOY WHICH DAY BY DAY IS SECRETLY
PERCEIVED IN IT. THE SUBTLE ORDER OF INITIATED
KNOWLEDGE
Examine thyself constantly, my beloved, and pay attention
to the steadiness of thy labours, and the troubles assailing
thee, thy lonely dwellingplace, the subtlety of thy mind and
the keenness of thy knowledge, the long period o( thy soli-
tude, and the frequent drogues of temptations that are con-
tinually administered by the true physician in order to heal
the inner man sometimes however by the demons. Sometimes
;
they come through illnesses and bodily sufferings, sometimes
through the terrors of the emotions of thy soul when it thinks
of the woes which will come in the end. Sometimes through
4S4 the tenderness and fostering of grace there will arise warmth
and sweet tears and spiritual joy and all the other things, to
be short.
Doest thou see with certainty throug — h all these that thy
wounds are going to be healed, that is that the affections
begin to grow weak? Put up a mark and enter into thyself
continually and see which of the affections have become weak
before thee which of them have reached their end and are
;
altogether finished which of them are beginning to become
;
silent in the health of thy soul, and not by the departure of
emotional influences; through the maturity of the mind and
not for lack of causes.
—
Doest thou now see perfectly as thou observest that
living flesh, w — hich is peace of the soul, is going to cover thy
open wound which of the affections continually trouble thee,
and which from time to time; and which are bodily, which
are psychic, and which of a mixed nature; and whether they
stir darkly, as being ill by recollections, or they assail the

THAT Wi: CAN UNDERSTAND THE DEGREE ETC. 325
soul vehemently whether they consequently behave stealthily
;
or imperiously; and how king mind, the governor of the
senses, looks at them when they knock at the door whether
;
it combates and vanquishes them by its force, or even does
not look at them or think of them and which of them are
;
the remnants of old ones, and which have been newly formed;
and whether the affections stir through representations, or by
apperception without any representation ; whether there is recol-
lection without affections, and emotion without allurements.
By these [symptoms] it is possible to recognize the degree
which the soul occupies. If the first mentioned alternative is
to be affirmed (though it does not prevail), this shows that
485 there is still strife in the soul though it is strong against [the
contrary powers]. If the second mentioned alternative is to be
affirmed, it almost proves that, as scripture says, David sat
in his house and the Lord had given him rest round about
from all his [enemies] l ).
These things are not to be connected with one affection,
but with the natural affections of desire and love also, as also
with the affection of love of glory, which forms images and
phantasies and allurements. And the affection of the love of
—
money when the soul participates of it secr—etly, though it
is not persuaded to commit any action thereby forms in the
mind images of things connected with the love of money in the
examples of wealth-gathering, and it induces the soul to think
of them and it excites the desire of possessing them, and so on.
Not all affections combat man by allurements. For some
of them burden the soul with troubles only. Dejection and
despondency and distress do not bring allurements nor comfort,
but only burden the soul with heaviness. The readiness of the
soul is demonstrated by a victory fought against those forces
which make use of allurements in the struggle.
For a man ought to possess all these, namely subtle know-
ledge and signs, in order that he may perceive, at every step
he takes, how far he is gone and in which country his soul
has begun to walk, in the land of [Canaan or beyond the Jordan.
Consider also this: whether the soul, through its illumination,
possesses sufficient knowledge for these distinctions or dis-
;
tinguishes them dimly, or is wholly destitute of such distinctive
1) 2 Sam. 7, 1

J I 6 THAT \YK CAN UNDERSTAND Till': DEGREE ETC.
486 faculties. Doest thou find with absolute certainty, that the
deliberations have begun to become clear: Does distraction
desist from the intellect at the time of prayer? Which affection
troubles thee when the mind approaches unto prayer? Doest
thou perceive that the power of solitude envelops the soul
with the quiet and the unusual peace which it engenders in
the mind? Is the mind continually snatched away spontane-
ously, by immaterial emotions, towards those things which it
is not allowed to interpret to the senses? Does there suddenly
blaze in them joy which makes the tongue silent by its incom-
parable delight? Does there constantly flow from the heart
some enjoyment which envelops the whole being in rapture,
without thy perceiving it? Is sometimes thy whole body pos-
sessed by some delight and joy, which no fleshly tongue can
express, so that thou esteemest all earthly things as ashes
and dung, even when thou recollectest them?
The first happens sometimes at the time of prayer, some-
times during the recitation sometimes when through constant
;
and prolonged meditation the spirit has become meditative
and the mind fervent.
The second usually happens without these. Often during
fortuitous works, usually however during the night and on
purpose, between sleeping and waking, sleeping though not
sleeping and waking though not waking. And the delight
which flows through the whole body is esteemed so high at
that time, that it seems as if the kingdom of heaven were
nothing else but this.
487 And further consider this: if the soul possesses the strength
to reject recollections of apperceptible things by the strength
of the hope which reigns over the heart and makes strong
the inner senses by an unfathomable conviction; and if the
heart has acquired, without forethought, the habit of being
captured so that it does no longer [perceive] earthly things,
through continual intercourse with our Saviour, and thou pos-
sessest knowledge so as to distinguish the different designations
—
of this intercourse, when thou nearest them solitude cul-
tivated without interruption will make it easy to the soul to
acynire the taste of these.
They disappear however, after having been present, through
tlie neglect of those who have received tlie;n, and for a long
time they do not reappear.

THAT \VT, CAN UNDERSTAND THE DEORKE E'l'C. 327
On account of these, man ventures to adduce with con-
fidence the testimony of his own mind; so the blessed Paul
says: Tor I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor any other thing shall
be able to separate me from the love of Christ '). Then should
bodily and psychic trouble, or persecution or hunger, or naked-
ness or loneliness, or captivity or clanger or the sword? No,
not even the angels of Satan, nor his powers with their evil
cunning; nor glory which makes efforts by its alluring flat-
teries nor oppressions and scorn by their vain blows.
;
If these things, my brother, to a larger or lesser extent
have not begun to show themselves in thy soul, thy labours
and troubles and all thy solitude are vain efforts. And even
488 if miracles were wrought by thy hands and thou shouldst
quicken the dead, this would be, nothing in comparison with
the absence of these. And it is becoming that thou arousest
thy self and with tears beseechest the Saviour of the world
that He may take away the veil from the heart, and disperse
from the inner firmament the darkness of the clouds of the
affections and that thou mayest be deemed worthy of seeing
;
the rays of daylight.
'Ihen thou wilt not dwell in darkness as one who is dead
for ever. Continual vigils with recitation and frecpient kneelings
performed between, will not fail one day to give this good to
him that is diligent. For those that have found them, have
found them through these works. And those who will find
them, will be able to do so through these works.
And while we are constantly abiding in solitude, performing
these works, and the mind is not bound by any thing or any
man without the soul, then by the works of inward excellence
we shall soon find in ourselves a partial, but veracious apper-
ception of them and we shall acquire certainty also concerning
the rest. Those who, while abiding in solitude, have experienced
God's lovingkindness, do not need much persuasion. Nor is
their soul sick by the affection of unbelief as those who doubt
the truth. The witness oftheir mind is for them sufficient persua-
sion, more than myriads of words not founded on experience.
1) Cf. Rom. 8, 38

:
328 ON THE INFLUENCES PROCEEDING FROM GRACE
LXXI
ON THE INFLUENCES PROCEEDING FROM GRACE
4S9
Thou must perpetually place a token in thy soul, and pay
attention to it. And when thou perceivest that divine care
begins to reveal itself to the soul, then understand that thou
art near the harbour of purity. As soon as man begins to be
lifted up above the affections, this holy force will cling to
the .soul, without leaving it, day or night, showing it God's
providence. And even the particulars of what is and comes
to pass, of yes and no, what happens to a man secretly and
manifestly and the facts relating to the creation of this world,
are revealed to the soul by that force which clings to it and
which reveals to it the creative power of God and shows it
divine providence which, without a break, follows and visits
this whole creation. And it shows the soul how this providence
follows man at all times, and, though he does not perceive
it and does not know it, preserves him against adversities at
all times and directs him towards what serves for the salvation
and the rest of his soul and body and to gain life.
Now this divine force, which works all these, shows itself
secretly to man, by intelligible revelation to his spiritual nature,
which is intellect. When man has been deemed worthy to receive
this power within his soul, he abides only in ecstasy and silence
and tears which always flow as water, so that he desists from
490 all work.
And thou must gaze at all times at this sight of God's
continual care for the work of Mis hands the mind absorbed
:
in ecstasy, the senses at rest, weak man prostrated on his face
in prayer, [in astatej in which no tongue can speak and in
which no heart can pray, but by astonishment at these tilings
even prayer is cut off.
This is the idleness which is more profitable than work,
when a man is purely at rest, with his senses and his impulses,
being continually prostrated before his Lord. And even his
bones in silence send up a glorification to God, in this so-
called idleness as the prophet says All my bones shall say
; :

ON Tllli INFLUENCES PROCEEDING FROM GRACE 329
Lord, who is like unto Thee21 ) At this time, above all affec-
tions, thou findest the demon of haughtiness bound and thrown
at the feet of the soul. By this gift, as it is said, man becomes
worthy of the love of God and of complete humility.
This first gift is tasted through solitude. And those who,
in service and observance, have abided within absolute solitude,
must necessarily know it. But when a man leaves solitude and
begins to be lax, it is withdrawn from him. And when he
enters again and cares for himself and clings diligently to the
usual service, he is again supplied with it, and it shows its
force to the soul. Then, when man has become wholly per-
fect, this force will cling to him inwardly and outwardly and
491 not one hour will he be without sighs and tears and the rest,
if he does not neglect2 ) the pure order of his service. Even now
there are men who have been deemed worthy of this partly.
And the peculiarities of the degree of perfection they recognize
from that which they possess partially. For, when a man has
tasted a small quantity ;i ) of wine from a large skin, he knows
how all the rest is, even when others drink a part or all the
remainder.
A man who possesses [this gift] in perfection, will not soon
be found, nay hardly at all. For this power is a gift of the
observance of solitude; and because in this our enervated ge-
neration there is none who keeps perfect solitude and complete
observance, we are also destitute of its gifts v j. He who possesses
these signs in writing of ink, but their practice is not found
in him by experience, resembles a man who bears in his arms
a cither adorned and provided with strong strings, but his
fingers do not know, because they are not trained, to play
thereon and to bring forth different melodies for his own
delight. For he only possesses the cither, but not the required
art. And he needs others to play on it before him and give
him enjoyment.
Do not rejoice when thou art rich in the knowledge ofmany
things; but rejoice when that which thou knowest is found
with thee practically. The former without the latter will retire
gradually and even end in haughtiness, through idleness. When
thou art zealous in the latter, thou wilt necessarily be illuminated
Ps- 35i IO 2) TOTtSO, moaning uncertain
3) rCAxann 4) cf. /hwk of the Dovc^ Introduction, p. XVI

330 ON THE INFLUENCES PROCEEDING FROM GRACE
by it without instruction. The eye of knowledge is experience;
its growth is brought about by continual service.
492 This will be to thee a luminous token of the serenity of
thy soul : when thou, examining thyself, findest thyself full of
mercy for all mankind, and when thy heart is afflicted by pity
for them and burns as with fire without personal discrimination.
While by these things the image of the Father in heaven is
continually seen in thee, thou canst recognize the degree of
thy behaviour, not by the discrimination of the labours, but
by the varying states to which thy intellect is subject. The
body is then wont to swim in tears, as the mind gazes at
spiritual things, while it is as if from the eyes there flowed
brooks which moisten the cheeks, without compulsion, spon-
taneously.
Now, l ) I know one who even during his sleep was over-
whelmed by ecstasy in God through the contemplation of
something which he had read in the evening. And while his
soul was amazed at this contemplative meditation, he per-
ceived, as it were, that he had meditated for long in the
motion of sleep and examined the ecstatic vision. It was in
the depth of the night, and suddenly he awoke from his
sleep while his tears dropped as- water and fell upon his
breast ; and his mouth was full of glorification and his heart
meditated in contemplation for a long time, with a delight
which did not come to an end. And through the many tears
that, without measure, were shed by his eyes, and through
the stupefaction of his soul by which all the members of his
body were relaxed, and of his heart in which some delight
493 was astir, he was not even able to accomplish his usual night-
service, except some psalm at break of dawn, so overwhelmed
was he by the many tears which as a fountain broke forth
from his eyes spontaneously, and by the ether spiritual things.
Let us also be zealous, my brethren. And before we go to
sleep, let us many times meditate upon glorifications and recited
psalm and passages of the holy scriptures, guarding ourselves
against evil recollections and from bad thought. And let us
provide :J our treasury with every beautiful thing. Then sleep
)
will overtake us while we are full of the recollection of God,
while our soul is "flowing with great desire for the things that
1) Cf. Introduction 2) Reading ^florCil instead of rdoal

ON TIIK IN'FLl/ENCKS PROCEEDING FROM CRACK 33 I
are good, through the grace of God which surrounds us in
our sleep and spends upon us its gifts while we are sleeping,
examining us, whether our body is free from any kind of
impurity, and the impulses of our heart pure from evil. And
through grace it will be impossible for the sons of the prince
of darkness to approach us because the sword and lance of
grace surround us. 13ut when they find us as they like to find
us, when grace has withdrawn from us because it disliked us-
and has removed us from itself as corpses void of life, then
they approach us, with all their evil, and try us by all sordid
and fearful impulses, according to the desire of their evil will.
And when such a thing happens to us in our sleep, let us
understand at once and recollect and perceive, that in that night
God's inspiration l ) was far from us. And how is it that the
494 demons have not devoured us? Because the divine will in whose
hand the soul of all flesh is placed, only allows [them] to ap-
proach us, that we should arouse and look at ourselves. It is not
possible for them to approach us when [inspiration] is near.
K&CLU^O
i")

ON TRUE KNOWLEDGE AND ON TEMPTATIONS ETC.
LXXII
ON TRUE KNOWLEDGE AND ON TEMPTATIONS AND
THAT IT IS BECOMING TO KNOW EXACTLY THAT
NOT ONLY WEAK AND INSIGNIFICANT AND UNE-
DUCATED PEOPLE BUT ALSO THOSE WHO HAVE
BEEN DEEMED WORTHY OF TEMPORARY APATHY
AND HAVE REACHED PERFECTION OF MIND AND
HAVE APPROACHED PARTIAL PURITY AS FAR AS
THIS COMPATIBLE WITH MORTALITY AND HAVE
IS
—
GAINED EXALTATION ABOVE AFFECTIONS IN SO
FAR AS IN THIS WORLD IT IS ALLOWED BY GOD IN
—
COMBINATION WITH LIFE IN AFFECTIBLE FLESH
FIAVE TO STRUGGLE AND ARE INJURED BY THE
AFFECTIONS BECAUSE OF THE BODY AND THAT
TO 'THEM ALSO ARE CONTINUALLY PERMITTED
['TEMPTATIONS) IN MERCY BECAUSE OF THE DAN-
GER OF HAUGHTINESS IN SOME DEGREE AND
THAT MANY TIMES 'THEY TRANSGRESS AND HEAL
THEMSELVES BY REPENTANCE GRACE ACCEPTING
THEM AGAIN
That every rational nature is liable to deviation without
distinction and that varying states pass through all men at
all times, the discriminate is able to understand from many
[symptoms] moreover the experiences of each day are wholly
;
sufficient to make him prudent if he is cautious and keeps to
what is his domain. [They also show him] how many varying
495 states of rest and unrest work upon the mind every day, so
that it suddenly passes from peace to perturbation without
any reason from anywhere and falls into unspeakable danger.
Even this is clearly described by the blessed Macarius, with
<>"reat care and devotion, in order to remind and instinct the
brethren, lest those who stand in the degree of purity give
way to despair at the time of contrary states, when there
happens to them an accidental [state] like [a change in] air,
provided that this is not due to neglect and relaxation, but
that these circumstances contrary to the scope of their mind,
happen to them while they are walking in their path.

ON TKL'K KNOWLEDGE AND ON TEMPTATIONS ETC. 333
And
also the blessed Euagrius witnessing- to this through
real experience, has committed it to writing, for the sake of
ampler confirmation, as it were lest any one should think that
the blessed Macarius wrote this in his letter fortuitously with-
out having examined his words carefully. Thus then by reason
of two veracious witnesses like these, the mind may accept,
without doubt, its consolation at the time of need.
What then? Varying- states happen to every man, like
[changes of j the air. Understand it : to every man ; for nature
is one. Do not think that he is speaking to insignificant men
only and that the perfect should be exempt from varying
states and that they stay in one class, without liability of
deviation and without the impulse of the affections, as the
Mesalleyane say. Therefore he says unto every man.
:
How is this, o blessed man ? He says : there are states of
496 cold, and soon after states of heat; and perhaps of hail, and
soon there-after of serenity. It is thus for our instruction strife,
:
then the help of grace. And sometimes the soul runs into a
storm and heavy billows assail it; then there comes a different
state and it is visited by grace; then joy fills the heart and
peace from God and chaste, peaceful deliberations. Grace
makes dawn here chaste deliberations on the bestiality and
impurity of those whom it had ordered away.
Therefore he warns, saying that after these chaste and
peaceful deliberations, accidents will befall the mind, that we
should not be sorry or despair; or at the time of rest caused
by grace, be puffed up, but that, at the time of joy, we
should look at trouble. He says that we should not be sorry
when accidents happen ; not that we should not resist them,
nor that the mind should accept them joyfully as something
natural belonging to us, but that thou shouklst not despair
even as the man who expected what is exalted above strife,
and perfect rest without varying states and without struggl — es
and blows, and freedom from the impulse of any adversity
the which it has not pleased our Lord God to give to our
nature in this world so that we should entirely desist from
labours and in consequence of this thought thou shouklst be
relaxed by despondency and desist from thy course-
But know that all the saints have to face this labour as
long as we are in this world, though we have ample con-
497 solation for it in secret. For every clay and at all times it is

334 ON TRUE KNOWLEDGE AND OX TEMPTATIONS ETC.
demanded of us that we give proof of our love unto God by
the struggle against temptations. And therefore we should not
be sorry namely, we should not be dejected in our struggle
;
but thus is our way prepared. ,For he that deviates from this
method, becomes a prey of the wolves'. Admirable is that
saint, who with a small word confirmed this section that is
loaded with significance and absolutely took doubt away from
the mind of the reader. ,For he that deviates from this method,
becomes a prey of the wolves'. This means that he, that pos-
sesses this intention and is minded to walk out of the way,
wishing to go in loneliness a way that has not been trodden
by the Fathers, is through this in danger of becoming the
prey of old wolves who are clad in lambs' clothes in order
stealthily to turn back foolish souls to their evil under the
pretence of truth. That at the time of joy we should look at
trouble, means: when by the influence of grace, suddenly
mighty emotions and amazement of the intellectual vision of
what is above nature, fall on the soul as the holy Euagrius
;
says when the holy angels approach us filling us with
:
spiritual sight, and all those who were in opposition to us
vanish, and there comes peace and unspeakable stupefaction
;
when thou art in this state; when grace envelops thee, and
the holy angels are near and around thee and, therefore, all
those who tried thee, have withdrawn from thee, then do not
498 extol thyself and do not think that thou hast reached now
the undisturbable harbour and the unchangeable air and that
thou art altogether exalted above this bay and the contrary
storms and that there is no fiend and no evil accidents. For
there were many who have thought thus and have fallen into
danger, as Euagrius says, namely the danger of thinking
:
that thou art greater than many others, and that thou deser-
vest these [spiritual distinctions! and that others, on account
of their insufficient knowledge, are destitute of the like but I
;
possess [those distinctions! duly, and therefore I have reached
perfect chastity and the degree of spirituality, and definite
renovation.
On the other hand recollect the impure deliberations and
the unclear images which printed themselves in thy mind in
the winterperiod, and the disturbancies and the disordered
deliberations which assailed thee shortly before, during that
gloomy darkness and how easily thou deviatedst towards the
;

ON TRUE KNOWLEDGE AND ON TEMPTATIONS ETC. 335
affections and hadst intercourse with them, when thy mind
was troubled, without being ashamed before the divine sight
and on account of the gifts and presents thou hadst received.
And know that all this was brought upon thee, in order to
humble thee, by the care of God, which provides for every
one of us as is profitable to him. But when thou exaltest
thyself on account of its gifts, it leaves thee, and thou wilt
wholly relapse into the practice of those things by which thou
wert tried in thy thoughts.
Know, therefore, that the fact that thou art standing, is not
due to thee nor to thy excellence ; but that it is grace which
499 bears thee on its handpalms so that thou art not moved.
These things thou hast to recollect at the time of joy, when
thy deliberation exalts itself, says our holy Father, and then
thou hast to weep and shed tears. And humble thyself at the
recollection of thy transgressions committed when [temptations
were] admitted to thee perhaps thou wilt be saved by acqui-
;
ring humility through them. Be not, however, dejected,
but expiate thy sins by deliberations of humility. Humility,
even without labours, expiates many sins. Labours without
humility on the contrary, are not only destitute of profit,
but cause us many evils. Therefore, expiate thy sins, by hu-
mility, as I have said. As salt is to all kinds of meat, so
is humility to all virtues. The force of many sins is able
to break this. Therefore it is necessary for the mind to suffer
continually by humiliation and by pain borne with discernment.
If we possess this, it makes us a son of God ; even without
service, it allows us to stand before God rich in virtues.
Without it, every service and every virtue and all labours
are vain.
Therefore God demands the alteration of the mind. By the
mind we acquire improvement and by the mind we become
despicable. So this alone is sufficient, without [any further)
help, to stand before God and to speak in our behalf.
Thank God without break on account of the fact that, not-
withstanding thy so weak and easily deviating nature, from
time to time thou art lifted up by the aid of grace to such
a height and t—o such gifts and remember in which sphere
500 thou then art above thy nature, and how when [tempta-
tions] are admitted to thee, thou art brought low and posses-
sest a brutish mind. And recollect the wretchedness of thy

JJ6 ON TRUE KNOWLEDGE AND ON TEMPTATIONS ETC.
nature and how easily thou becomest subject to varying states,
as also one of the saintly Fathers has said When thou art
:
assailed by the deliberation of haughtiness which desires to
enumerate thy virtues, then say Father, look at thy fornication.
:
Me means the fornication by which the deliberations are tried
at the time of the admittance [of temptations] and with which
man is provided by grace, be it as a means of strife or as
a means of help, according to the degree in which grace helps
us. Seest thou how clearly this admirable Father explains the
matter? ,When thou art approached by the deliberation of
haughtiness, because of the elevation of thy behaviour, then
say: Father, look at thy fornication!' It is manifest that this
Father was speaking to a great one, because it is impossible
that deliberations of haughtiness should assail other people
than those who occupy a high degree and are behaving in a
praiseworthy way. For this affection attacks the soul when
virtue has been exercised, in order to bereave it of its per-
formance.
Also from one of the letters of Macarius thou canst learn,
if thou clesirest, which degrees those saints occupy unto whom
temptations are admitted. That letter was written by Macarius
to all his beloved sons, showing clearly how struggles and
the help of grace are provided by God, through which it has
pleased Mis wisdom to train them as long as they abide in
501 this life, struggling against sin, in behalf of excellence. This
lie does in order that at all times their looks may be fixed
upon Him ancl that, by continually looking at Him, His holy
love may be augmented in them. So that, when they seek
continually refuge with Him against the ardour of the affec-
tions ancl the fear of deviations, they are confirmed in faith,
hope and love.
So these things are not said to those who continually are
in contact with men ancl wander about everywhere, participa-
ting in impure actions and passions [and living] in a state of
relaxation. Nor are they said to those who perform righteous-
ness in works which have nothing to do with solitude and
who at every moment are captured by the senses, and who
at all times are in danger of falling on account of the com-
pulsion exercised on them by the things which happen to
them involuntarily, through circumstances which they have not
foreseen, so that they are unable to guard completely not

ON TRUE KNOWLEDGE AND AN TEMPTATIONS ETC. 337
only their deliberation but even their senses. But they are
destined for those who by the great watchfulness with which
they guard their bodies and their deliberations, keep altoge-
ther aloof from the perturbations and conversations of men,
and who by having given up all, even their soul, are able to
guard their mind in prayer and to receive various provisions
from grace, in perfect solitude. And under the arm of the
knowledge of the Lord they are brought up and secretly
made wise by the spirit, while they have rest from works and
the sight of things and possess a mind dead to the world.
The affections do not die but intercourse [with them] dies,
;
because they keep aloof from things and because they are
helped by grace.
LXXIII
THE CONCISE SENSE OF THE [EOREGOINGj SECTION
502
TOGETHER WITH EXPLANATIONS OE WHAT
HAS BEEN SAID
The concise sense of the foregoing section is to communi-
cate to us that at every momentl of the four and twenty
)
hours of the day, we are in want of repentance. The expla-
nation of the denotation of repentance, in its real practical
sense, is continual mournful supplication in contrite prayer,
offered to God for the forgiveness of previous sins and peti-
;
tion to be guarded against future ones2 Therefore our Lord
).
also has sustained our weakness by prayer: Watch and pray,
that ye enter not into temptation3 ). And : Pray, and do not
faint4
).
And: Watch ye therefore, and pray always5
).
Ask, and it shall be given unto you ; seek, and ye shall
find ; knock, and it shall be opened unto you ; for every one
that asketh receiveth ; and he that seeketh findeth • and to
him that knocketh it shall be opened ). And he corroborates
His word strongly and exhortates us strongly by the parable
of the friend who went to his friend in the middle of the
night and asked him for bread. , Verily, I say unto you, though
ho will not rise and give him, because he is friend, yet be-
1) Introduction 2) Cf. Book of the Dovc\ p. 6 and note 3
3) Matthew 26,41 4) Cf. Luke 18,1
5) Luke 21,36 6) Matthew 7,7sq.
Vcrh. Afd. Lettcrk. 1922(Wcnsinck).

JO8 THE CONCISE SENSE OF THE [FOREGOING] ETC.
cause of his importunity he will rise and give him as many
as he needeth 1
).
And ye also: Pray and do not faint2
).
Blessed is the unspeakable encouragement of the Giver, who
exhorts us saying : Ask from me and I will give you gifts.
5°3 And He will also provide you with all that is profitable, ac-
cording to His knowledge. "These words are full of encoura-
gement and great confidence.
And as our Lord knows that He does not take away lia-
bility of deviation before the cup of death |is drunk], and,
this being so, that man is near to a change from e — xcellency
to deterioration, and nature susceptible of accidents there-
fore He urges us to continual beseechings. For if there were
in this world a place of security whereto a man could go and
thenceforth his nature would be exempt from need and his
—
service from fear then He would not have exhorted us
towards prayer nor would He have urged us diligently. In the
world to be men will not offer prayers unto God, with be-
seechings concerning various things. For in that place of free-
dom our nature will no longer be susceptible of variation, nor
bound by the fear of opposition, but perfect in every way. There-
fore His care not only drives us unto prayer and watchfulness,
but even scourges us with the whip of temptations, in view
of the subtlety and incomprehensibility of those things which
continually happen to us and superate the power of our know-
ledge, things among which we are found continually and in-
voluntarily. And even although our mind be firm and willed
to the good, yet often Flis care scourges us with temptations,
as the blessed Paul says : Lest I should be exalted through
the abondance of the revelations, there was given me a thorn
5°4 in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. F"or this
thing I besought the Lord thrice that He might take from
me temptation (namely that I might in freedom perform the
work which He had ordered me). And He said unto me:
My grace is sufficient for thee : for my strength is made per-
fect in weakness:! ).
Therefore4 ), my Lord, if this is thy will, and our childish
nature so much needs a master who rules and exhorts that
even a man who is so fond of thy love as I am and so zea-
i) Luke 11,8 2) I,ukc lS, I 3) 2 Corinthians I2,7sqij.
4) The following passage is put into the mouth of I'aul.

THE CONCISE SENSE OF THE [FOREGOING] ETC. 339
lous a follower of good that he does not see the world at all
because of his drunkenness in thee, so that thou hast brought
me so far as to see revelations and visions which a fleshly
tongue is not allowed to interpret, and to hear the sound of
the service of the spiritual orders, so that I am deemed worthy
of sight full of spiritual sanctities, that such a man as I with
all this is not able t—o guard his own person, I who am a
man perfect in Christ, because there is still something whi — ch
because of its subtleness resists the p — ower of my knowledge
I that possess the mind of Christ [if all this be so] then,
my Lord, I rejoice at my illnesses, at troubles, reclusions,
bonds, compulsions, on the part of nature or on the part of
natural beings, or on the part of the fiend of nature.
Joyfully, therefore, I will bear my illnesses, namely my
temptations, which the power of Christ brings upon me. If,
with all these, 1 still require the rod of temptations in order
505 to augment thy influence upon me and that I may be guar-
ded by thy presence, I known that there is none whom thou
lovest better than me.
And because thou hast made me greater than many others
and hast not given to any of my fellow Apostles what thou
—
hast given to me namely to know the glorifications of thy
powers; and because thou hast called me an elect vessel and
hast entrusted me with the guardianship of thy love because
-,
of all these and that I know that the preaching of thy gospel
has made excellent progress, while I am free from the bonds
of temptations on account of all these things I know that thou
wouldst have given men freedom, if this were profitable to
me. But thou hast not wished that I should be without trouble
and without care in this world and thou werst not anxious
;
to promote the preaching of thy gospel to the same degree
as thou werst anxious that I should profit by my temptations,
and my soul be kept healthy with thee.
Therefore, o thou who art discriminating, if the gfift of the
temptations be so great that a man, even if he be as exalted
and advanced in spiritual state as Paul's degree was , still
requires fear and watchfulness and gathers profit by meeting
temptations, who then can reach a place of security in the
world of mortality full of robbers, and receive stabilityl (which
)
K&cuA^-sn
r£.\

340 THE CONCISE SENSE OF THE FOREGOING] ETC.
[
was not given to the holy angels, lest they should become
—
perfect before us), thus receiving before all people, spiritual
—
and bodily ones such a gift that, according to his wish, he
should be without varying states at all, without a temptation
even approaching to his deliberations ?
The order of this world, according to the conception of all
506 holy writings, is this, that even if we received a thousand
blows every day, our mind would not become humble and we
would desist from the course in the arena but that on account
;
ofone smalt cause, we gain the victory possibly and win our crown.
This world is an arena and a running place. And this time is
a time of struggle. And the time and the place of the struggle
are not subject to a law. This means: the King does not set
a terminus to his warriors, till the struggle is ended and all
the world is gathered within the gate of the king of kings
and it is examined there who has been constant in the war
and has not been defeated, and who has taken to flight. How
often will it happen that a man who was good for nothing
and constantly beaten and thrown down because of his want
of training, and who was always in a state of weakness, will
snatch the banner from the hand of the valiant warriors and
make his name famous above that of the doughty ones, the
able and knowing battle-troops, and receive the crown and
gifts which are honoured by all his fellows.
Nobody, therefore, should give way to despondency. Only
:
he should not despise prayer, nor neglect to ask help from
our Lord. And let us take this to heart, that, as long as we
are in this world and dwelling in this body, even if we are
lifted up unto the vault of heaven, it is not possible to be
free from toil and injury and care. This is the sum of it all.
Pardon me. What exceeds this is superfluous.

:1
ON TJIK DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES ETC. 34
LXXIV
507 ON THE DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES AND THE
SCOPE OF THE WHOLE COURSE AND THE GREAT-
NESS OF THE LOVE UNTO MANKIND AND THE
SPIRITUAL AIM WHICH IT REACHES IN ALL THE
SAINTS CREATING WITHIN THEM A DIVINE LIKE-
NESS BY THE RICH LOVE WHICH HE POURS OUT
UPON MANKIND
The scope of the whole course consists in these three
Repentance, purity and perfection. What is repentance? To
desist from former [sins] and to suffer on account of them.
And what is the sum of purity? A heart full of mercy unto
the whole created nature. And what is perfection? Depth of
humility, namely giving- Up all visible and invisible things.
Visible things : all that which is sensible. In visible things : all
thinking about them. Another time the same Father was asked:
What is repentance? He answered: A broken heart. And what
is humility? He replied: Embracing a voluntary mortification
regarding all things. And what is a merciful heart? He replied:
The burning of the heart unto the whole creation, man, fowls
and beasts, demons and whatever exists • so that by the recol-
lection and the sight of them the eyes shed tears on account
of the force of mercy which moves the heart by great com-
passion. Then the heart becomes weak ') and it is not able
to bear hearing or examining injury or any insignificant suf-
fering of anything in the creation. And therefore even in
behalf of the irrational beings and the enemies of truth and
even in behalf of those who do harm to it, at all times he
508 offers prayers with tears that they may be guarded and streng-
thened ; even in behalf of the kinds of reptiles, on account of
his great compassion which is poured out in his heart without
measure, after the example of God.
And what is prayer? He replied: The mind's being free
from all that is earthly and the heart's turning its gaze com-
pletely towards the desire of future hope. Who deviates from
this, is as one who sews in his furrow mixed seed and as one
who ploughs with ox and ass together.
1) Iitt.: small

342 ON THE DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES ETC.
How is humility acquired? He replied: By constant recollec-
tion of trespasses, by expectation of near death, by dressing
meanly, by always choosing the lowest place and by always
undertaking low and humble work, without compulsion, by
constant silence, by disliking crowded meetings, by being un-
known and disregarded, by choosing distincly one occupation,
by hating intercourse with other persons, by disliking profits.
All his qualities are based upon these.
And his mind must be exalted above vituperating and re-
proaching anyone and above zealotism. And his hand shall
not be against all. Nor the hand of all with him. But he shall
be a solitary, only occupying himself with his own things, and
lonely. And he shall not take upon himself the care of any
one in the world except himself. In short abiding abroad and
:
poverty and lonely dwelling give birth to humility and purify
the heart. As to those who have reached perfection, their
token is, that if ten times every day they are delivered to
burning for the sake of the love of mankind, they are not
509 saturated with it. As also Moses said to God : If thou wilt not
pardon the children of Israel, blot me out of thy book which
thou hast written 1). And as also the blessed Paul said"): I
could desire to be removed afar from Christ :i ), if thereby the
children of Israel would come near to the faith of life. And
if it be thus that it is possible that they, for this reason, will
believe in Christ and will come to life everlasting and will not
be alienated from the living God. Then, as is written : I re-
joice in my sufferings for you, o peoples n ). Even so the other
Apostles have undergone all kinds of death, for the sake of
the love of the life of mankind. The sum of all is God, the
Lord of all, who from love of His creatures, has delivered I lis
son to death on the cross. For God so loved the world, that
He gave his only begotten son for it l ). Not that He was not
able to save us in another way, but in this way it was pos-
sible to show us His abundant love abundantly, namely by
bringing us near to Him by the death of His son. If He had
anything more clear to Him, He would have given it us, in
order that by it our race might be His. And out of His great
love He did not even choose to urge our freedom by com-
pulsion, though He was able to do so. But His aim was, that
1) Cf. Exodus 32,32 2) The text has some words which i^ive no sense here
and are wanting in the Greek translation. 3) Cf. Col. 1,24 4) Cf. John 3, 16.

:
ON Tlll<: DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES ETC. 343
we should come near to Him by the love of our mind.
And our Lord obeyed His father out of love unto us,
taking- upon Him scorn and suffering joyfully, as Scripture says
Who
5'° for the joy that was set before him endured the cross,
despising the shame 1 ). Therefore our Lord said in the night
in which He was betrayed : This is my body which is given
for the salvation of the world unto life. And this is my blood
which is shed for all for the remission of sins 3 ). In behalf of
them I offer myself.
And so all the saints have reached this accomplishment when
they became perfect, so that they resembled God in effusion
of love and compassion for mankind. And they asked for them-
selves as a token of their resembling God, that they should
be perfect in the love of their fellows. So did also the soli-
tary Lathers, that they might bear in themselves constantly
this likeness full of the life of Christ, the Lord of the Universe.
Ihe blessed Antonius thought that he never could do any-
thing so useful to himself as that which was profitable to his
neighbour, in the opinion that the profit of his neighbour was
his excellent service. Analogous is a saying concerning the
blessed Agathon: ,1 wished that I could find a leper, and give
him my body and take his'. Doest thou see the perfect love2
Lven in outward things he could not bear to displease his
neighbour rather than himself. He possessed namely a knife,
which a brother saw and liked it. And he did not allow him
5'i to leave his cell till he had taken it. And when he possessed
a thing and saw some one who wanted it, he did not lay any
further claim to it.
What do I mean by these things [which include] that many
of them have given their bodies even to the beasts and the
sword and the fire on behalf of their neighbours r It is not
possible that a man should reach this degree of love, with
the exception of that one who secretly perceives his faith.
And it is not possible that those who love this world, should
acquire the love of mankind. When a man has acquired love,
he is clad with God at the same-time. He that has put on
God, never can be persuaded to acquire any other thing ex-
cept Him, but he puts off his body even. And if he is clad
with the world or with love of his life, these will not allow
I) Ilehr. 12,2 2) Cf. Matth. 26,26,28

344 ON TIIE DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES ETC.
him to put on God. For he is witness he that does not forsake
:
and hate all, even himself, cannot be my disciple1 ). Not only
that he should leave them, but that he should ever hate them.
And if he cannot be a disciple, how can He dwell in him?
The interrogator. How is it that the service of hope is
so delightful, and its labours so few and its work so easy to
the soul?
The Father. This is because it excites the natural longing
in the soul and gives them this cup to drink and makes them
drunk. And from this moment they nevermore perceive fatigue
but become apathetic against troubles. And during the whole
of their course it is to them as if they were moving in the
512 air without bodily motion, without seeing anything of the diffi-
culty of the road or the streams and hills that are before
them but the crooked becomes to them straight and rough
;
places plain2 because they always see the bosom oftheir Father;
),
and all those things which are far and invisible it makes to
them clear in themselves, so that they gaze at them myste-
riously with the hidden eye of faith. For all the parts of the
soul become hot as by fire, on account of the expectation of
those things which, though far, become as near; for towards
them is tended the whole direction of their deliberations; and
they hasten to know when they will reach [their aim] and
when they will approach unto every single virtue by practice.
They do not practice them partly, but all of them toge-
ther, at the same time. F"or they do not take their course
along the king's way, as the generality of men, but choose
short paths along which a few heroes move, who easily reach
the Apartment. For hope warms them as with fire, and they
cannot pause in their incessant course, on account of their
joy. And to them happens as in the word of Jeremia : I said :
I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his
name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut
up in my bones:!). Such is the recollection of God in the heart
of those who move in the expectation of the promise. Short
513 paths I call the concise virtues, because in them there is no
winding nor the long space of many ways of discipline leading
from here to there, nor place nor time nor distraction. But
they stand on the way and accomplish it at once.
l) Cf. Luke 14,33 2) Isaia 40,4 3) Jeremia 20,9

ON THE DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES ETC. 345
The interrogator. Wat is apathy?
I he Father answers. Apathy is not [the state] that does
not perceive the affections, but that which does not accept
them, so that on account of the many virtues possessed, mani-
fest and hidden ones, the affections have become weak and
cannot easily assail the soul. Neither does the spirit want to
look at them every time, because at all times its emotion is
filled with meditation and intercourse with excellent thoughts,
which move with insight in the mind. And when an affection
is beginning to move, the spirit at once hastens away from it
through some insight which it perceives in the mind, and the
affection remains idle. As also the blessed Euagrius says the
mind which by the grace of God performs works of excell : ence
and approaches unto knowledge, perceives little of the foolish
part of the soul. For its knowledge dra?s it on hio-h and
alienates it to all things in the world; this happens also be-
cause, on account of their purity, their mind has become subtle
and light and swift. Forther the mind is purified by asceticism,
because the body is desiccated, and also in consequence of the
fulness of solitude and the long space of time passed in it.
Therefore it swiftly alights on several things towards which
5'4 their contemplation draws them in ecstasy. Therefore they are
rich in contemplation, and are never in want of abundant in-
sight in their spirit, apart from the fact, that the Spirit ripens
its fruits in them. And in the course of time also the eye
loses sight of the recollections that come from the heart and
which stir the affections in the soul and are a principal power
of Satan. But when the soul does — not associate with the af-
fections by meditating upo — n them because it is continually
occupied by other care the power of their nails cannot
take hold of the soul's spiritual senses.
The interrogator: What are the characteristics ofhumility
?
I he father answers: As presumption dissipates the soul
by phantastic distraction on account of the power inciting it
to fly round the whole creation in the cloud of its delibera-
tions, so humility is the power which concentrates the soul's
being by the peace of its deliberations and the reclusion of
the soul within its self. And as the soul is unknown and invi-
sible to the fleshly eye, so the humble is unknown amongst
mankind. And as the soul in the body is hidden from sight
and from mingling with every man, so the truly humble not

346 ON" THE DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES ETC
only does not desire to be seen and known among- mankind,
because of his —being- hidden a — nd recluded from all, but it is
even his desire if possible to be shut off from his soul
and to be within himself in total quiet and rest of his emo-
tions and senses , as something that does not exist in the
515 creation and has not come into existence and is not at all,
so that he does not even wish for himself to be known and
perceived. And as long as he is hidden and shut off from the
world, he is wholly with his Lord.
The humble is never pleased to see crowds and gatherings
of people, noise and rumour, nor riches and finery, nor the
luxury which is a consequence of them, nor speech and in-
tercourse, rumour and distraction of the senses. But above all
he chooses concentration and reclusion with himself alone, to
be quiet and shut off and lonely and left to himself in a so-
litary place void of all beings and separated from the whole
creation. And in every respect smallness and limitation and
want and poverty is beloved by him. And he is not occupied
with many things and labours, but at all times he is satisfied
and without care, without troublesome mingling with worldly
things, so that his deliberations do not wander from his self,
because he knows that if he alights upon many things it is
not possible for him to remain without confused emotions. For
many practices cause many cares. And many cares are a ga-
thering-point of varied thoughts and deliberations. Then he
would have to give up his being exalted above the care of
—
earthly things, in peace of deliberations except for the small
—
necessary things which are inevitable with a spirit occupied
with a single care, the emotions being in a state of peace.
And then necessary thing's would not allow him to keep silent
516 and so he would be injured and would cause injury. Thus there
would be opened a gate for the affections and discriminating
quiet would disappear, humility would flee, the gate of salva-
tion would be shut. And because of all this, he continually
keeps his soul away from the many things, and at all times
thou findest him quiet and at rest and humble and peaceful.
In the humble there is never violence nor terror nor con-
fusion, nor hot nor quick emotions. But at all times he abides
in rest. If heaven should fall on the earth, the humble would
not be moved.
Not every one who is quiet, is humble. But every one who

:;
ON THE DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES ETC. 34/
is humble is also quiet. There does not exist one who is
humble without being submissive. Those who are submissive
without being humble are found in large numbers. This is the
meek and humble concerning whom our Lord has said Learn
:
of me, that I am meak and lowly in heart ; and ye shall find
rest unto your souls J). The humble is content at all times,
because there is nothing which moves his spirit. As it is not
possible for a man to move a mountain, so the spirit of the
humble is unmoved, if it is possible to say so. And perhaps
it is not even foolish to say that even the humble does not
belong to this world, because he is not destroyed nor moved
by distresses even [emotions] of joy cause ecstasy and effusion
:
to him. But all his joy and true excultation is in the things
of his Lord.
— Connected with humility — are patience, a concentrated self
517 which is [real humility a low voice, little speech, self-
J
contempt, mean clothes, a modest gait, bashful looks, effusion
of mercy, easily flowing tears, a lonely soul, a broken heart,
the not being moved by anger, absence of distraction of the
senses, moderate wishes, moderate wants in every respect, wil-
lingness to bear, patience, intrepidity, manliness of heart born
from hatred of temporal life, endurance of temptations, few
emotions which are not swift, extinguished deliberations, keep-
ing of secrets, chastity, bashfulness, modesty, and above all
continual silence, continual having recourse to ignorance. The
humble is never approached by necessity which makes him
confused. The humble, even when he is alone, is shameful for
his soul.
I wonder whether there exists a truly humble man, wdio
ventures to pray to God when he approaches unto prayer, or
who is worthy of this, or of asking Him anything, or who
knows what he shall pray. But when all his emotions are quiet
and he only hopes for mercy, [being uncertain] which order
will be given concerning himself by the adorable Majesty
when his face is bent towards the earth and the inner gaze
of the heart lifted up towards the door of the holy of holies
of the Highest, the cloud of whose dwelling-place blinds the
eyes of the Seraphs, and whose splendour terrifies the legions
of their orders, when silence lies upon all their classes and
1) Mallhew 11,29

348 ON THE DISCRIMINATION OF VIRTUES ETC.
518 they expect the rising of mysteries from the domain of in-
visible 'things, in an airless womb, with emotions without voice,
with unbodily senses, with apperception without resemblance1
),
without seeing the revelations which reach them, the vehe-
mence of their emotions being too weak to endure the waves
of His mysteries then he does not venture to say anything,
;
but According to thy will, my Lord.
:
These things so far I have endeavoured to write to thee
in plain words, which the spirit could attain without scrutiny
on account of their manifest sense things by the reading of
;
which alone the mind forgets the ways and the dealings of
this world and its fleshly life, migrating then with the spirit unto
its true and profitable world. [I have written this], asking thy
love that, when thou comest in contact with these mysteries,
thon shalt not leave them without profit, so that they should
be found with thee to be dead sentences ; lest it should hap-
pen to thee as it happened to those who were invited to the
spiritual meal but excused themselves. Behold, the table is
prepared, spiritual ideas are ranged upon it, and all delightful
things are ready ; and the bridegroom expects that we shall
enter and rejoice with him. Let us, therefore, not excuse our-
selves, lest there be said to us also the word that was said
concerning them. What then? Verily, I say unto you, that
none of those invited, shall eat from my meal.
LXXV
ON HIDDEN STATES AND THE POWERS AND
519
INFLUENCES WHICH ARE IN THEM
This may be taken for true by thee, that the practice of
marvellous things, and the foreseeing of future things, and
temptations, and rest from strife, and victory over every one
of the affections, and the presence of every one of the vritues,
and consolation, for a certain time, from grace, and purity of
prayer, and warmth of spirit, and spiritual joy, and all the
other things with which a man fatigues himself for a certain
—
time, with a good intention and a mournful heart that in
1) The: in the text to he placed after KifiOCVr^.1

ON HIDDEN STATES AND THE POWERS AND ETC. 349
all these God will condescend to accomplish man's will at any
time. And when He sees his intention and longing He grants
him his wish and satisfies him.
As to the mysteries which belong to the spirit, namely the
emotions during spiritual prayer, and the entering of the mind
behind the curtain of the holy of holies, and the apperception
—
of the indestructible inheritance if a man does not pay
their duty, God is not willing to grant them, even if the whole
creation should beseech in behalf of him. Their duty is purity
of the soul. When a man has reached purity from the affec-
tions, what no eye has seen and no ear has heard and what
has not entered into the heart of man to ask in prayer, is
revealed to him by purity, which during no moment ceases
from mysteries and spiritual visions. And what the force of
520 spring is wont to work unto the nature of the earth, this grace
works unto the soul by purity. The power of spring makes
even the smallest roots in the valleys bud, warming the earth
as fire does the cauldron, so that it sends forth the treasures
of the plants which God has laid in the earth's nature, to the
gladness of the creation and to His glory.
So grace makes manifest all the glory which God has hid-
den in the nature of the soul showing the soul this glory and
making it glad because of its own beauty. So that when it
sees the great and unspeakable treasures which God has laid
in it and which were hidden from it by the defiled mantle of
affections and ignorance, but which now that it has — torn asunder
the garment of the affections, He has shown to it it is cap-
tured on account of its gladness by His love and turns its
back on earthly things.
Moreover it does not remember the body which hid its own
beauties from its sight. Then it sees heavenly beauties in itself
as the exact mirror which by its great purity shows the beauty
of faces. Holiness suits those who are holy. All excellence
whatever and all service by which righteousness is accomplished,
may be performed and acquired and accomplished without so-
litude but apathy and purity cannot be acquired without so-
;
litude.

350 SHORT SAYINGS
LXXVI
SHORT SAYINGS
52i
The blessed Paul leaches us saying Put off the old man
:
and put on the new man, which after God is created in righte-
ousness and holiness l
).
He does not say Put on the new man over the old man.
:
For he knows that this is not possible. Look, how wisely he
gives his order. He does not say Put on the new man who
:
is renewed by the knowledge o( God, but he says, first put
off this, and then put on the new. Also he says definitely in
another place Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
:
God, neither does corruption inherit incorruption ~). By incor-
ruption he means the knowledge of the other world. By cor-
ruption and ilesh and blood he designates the corruptible af-
fections of soul and body, which have the place of their motion
in the fleshly mind. Purity he calls the new man, and by the
kingdom of God he means the exalted and intelligible con-
templation of the blessed motions of the essential rays into
which the saintly soul only is allowed to enter when its in-
corruptible emotions are lifted up above corruption and flesh
and blood.
If:! the apple of thy soul's eye has not been purified, do
)
not venture to look at the sun, lest thou be bereaved of thy
usual visual power and thou be thrown into one of those intel-
522 ligible places which are Tartarus and a type of Hell, namely
darkness without God, whither those who with the impulses
of their mind leave nature, wander by the cognitive nature
which they possess. Therefore he that ventured to go to the
banquet in sordid garments, was ordered to be thrown out
into that outer darkness. By the banquet is designated the
sight of spiritual knowledge. The institutions in it are the mani-
fold divine mysteries, full of joy and exultation and delight of
the soul. The garment of the banquet he calls the mantle of
purity the sordid garments the emotions of the affections in
;
the soul which are defiled, the outer darkness, the state with-
1) Cf. Ephcs. 4,22,24 2) I Cor. 15,50
3) The following passage occurs also p. 16 sq. Cf. the Introduction.

SHORT SAYINGS 35I
out any delight of true knowledge and communion with God.
He that is clad with such garments and ventures to think
phantastically with his intellect on the heights of God and to
introduce and to settle his soul within the spiritual contem-
plations of that holy banquet which is made to dawn in the
pure only, and who, partaking only of the delight of the affec-
—
tions, wishes to mingle in the delight of that banquet is
suddenly overwhelmed, as it were by some hallucination, and
expelled thence unto the place without rays, which is called
Hell and destruction, which is ignorance and oblivion of God.
For it has been said that the things of God come of their
own, if there is a pure and undeiiled place. That they come
of their own, means that it naturally belongs to purity that
heavenly light shines in it, without investigation and labour
S23 on our part. For in the pure heart, the new heaven is stamped;
of which the sight is light and the room is spiritual. As also
in another place it is said : As the magnet-stone has the natural
faculty to attract atoms of iron, so has spiritual knowledge
[the faculty to attract] the pure heart.
Though it has been handed down rightly by the true ones
that no mind is absolutely steadfast against the allurements
of the affections in this life, yet I say with confidence without
being afraid of the truth of experience, that he who is clad
with the garment of mourning in his mind, is not only invincible
against the allurements of the effections, but a hero in the
war against them and a victor, because they absolutely do not
venture to show themselves with the intention of strife, nor do
they even venture to appear from afar where there is a
mourning soul which has made itself a wailing-place with various
lamentations on account of its sins. As it has been said by
the blessed Jacob : It makes its abode in the grave, till it
meets the beloved Joseph. Where there is the bitterness of
mourning, I do not believe that the above-mentioned pleasure
of the affections is admitted.
But I say that in watchfulness lies this service and confidence,
exalted above fear. H — e that is constantly in a state of mourning
because of his fear as he docs not know what the end of
—
his course will be • is more excellent than he that is con-
524 stantly in the way of gladness, because he perceives the hope
of his service.
O
thou whose town is vanquished by inward affections, put

352 SHORT SAYINGS
on the armour of mourning' and persecute them and save thy
soul from their hands. For always invincible is this weapon
and that of confidence, and tried by the true ones.
LXXVII
THIS CHAPTER IS FULL OF LIFE
O thou wretched man, wishest thou to find life? Take faith
and humility in order to find by them mercy and help and
consolation from God and protection secretly and openly.
,
Desirest thou to acquire these, which are the fountain of life?
Put on sincerity, from the beginning. In sincerity walk before
God, and not in knowledge. Sincerity is combined with faith;
subtlety and the reflections of knowledge, with presumptuous
thoughts presumptuous thoughts, with being removed from God.
;
When thou liest before God in prayer, then be in thy con-
sideration as a an ant and as the reptiles of the earth and as
the beetle. And stammer as a villager and speak not before
Him with knowledge. With a childlike mind approach unto
God and walk before Him, that thou mayest be worthy of
the paternal care which fathers entertain in behalf of their
young children.
525 It has been said
:
The Lord guards the children. A child
may approach a serpent and take it at its neck ; and the
animal will not bite. A child may go naked during — the whole
winter. And while others are clad — and covered yet the
cold penetrates all their members he sits down naked in
the day of frost and. ice, without suffering, because the body
of their childhood is covered by a different, invisible garment,
by that hidden care which guards the frail members of child-
hood, lest injury from any side approach them. Doest thou
now believe that there is a secret care in behalf of the tender
body which is expecially liable to all kinds of injuries on
account of its tenderness and the weakness of its joints, so
that it is guarded from obnoxious influences so that they do
not cause suffering? For the Lord guards the child. Thou must
not only apply this and believe it in the case of children,
but also in the case of those who, being wise in the world,
leave their knowledge, and relying upon that wisdom which is

8
THIS CHAPTER IS FULL OF LIFE 353
all-sufficient become children by their own will. Then they learn
wisdom, which is not to be learnt by labours of exercise.
Also the blessed Apostle, who was wise in divine things,
has beautifully said in an admonition If any man seemeth to
:
be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be
wise Y ). But beseech God, that He may grant thee to reach
the degree of faith. If thou perceivest the delight of faith in
thy soul, it is not difficult for me to say that there is nothing
further which withholds it from Christ. And it is not difficult
5 26 for it to be always captivated and not to perceive earthly
things but to forget this weak world and the recollection of
its things. On behalf of this pray without dejection and ask
;
it with tears and beseech fervently ; and supplicate with great
earnestness, till thou hast received it. Further no fatigue will
be necessary.
Thou wilt be deemed worthy of this, if beforehand thou
compellest thy soul to cast thy care on God, in faith, and so
thou wilt change thy care for His care. Then, when He sees
that in utter serenity of spirit thou art willed to believe God
in things which concern thee and that thou compellest thy
soul to confide in God more than in thyself, that power with
which thou art not acquainted, will take hold of thee, so that
thou wilt be affected in an apperceptive way by the power
which works in thee, no room being left for doubt.
By this power which they perceived, many went into the
fire without fear, and walked on water without thinking of the
possibility that they could be drowned in it, because faith
strengthened the senses of their soul so that it felt an inward
conviction that resolution could not be weakened nor look on
terrible things except with a gaze exalted bove the senses.
Take care not to think at all, that spiritual knowledge can
be received by psychic knowledge. It is not only that spiritual
knowledge cannot be received by psychic knowledge, but it
is even impossible that those who zealously try to acquire
training" in psychic knowledge should be deemed worthy to
527 perceive spiritual knowledge. And if any of them should desire
to approach unto spiritual knowledge, before having denied
psychic knowledge and all its subtle orders a — nd intricacies and
before having reached childhood of spirit it will not be
1) 1 Cor. 3, 1
Verh. Afd. Lettcrk. 1922 (Wensinck).

354 'ntlS CHAFTKU IS FULL OF LIFE
possible for him to approach even a little way towards it.
But its customs and perverted impulses become to him many
hindrances, before he gradually forgets them.
Spiritual knowledge is simple, not illuminated by psychic
deliberations. Before the mind has been freed from manifold
deliberations and has reached the unified simplicity of purity,
it is not able to perceive spiritual things.
This order of knowledge, consisting therein that man here
already perceives the delight of the life of the world to be,
rejects much deliberation. And psychic knowledge is not able,
apart from the gatherings of many deliberations, to know
anything which is received by serenity of spirit. And the word
of our Lord is not denied : Except ye be converted and be-
come as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven l ). Indeed, many are those who do not reach this
innocence but on account of their beautiful works a portion
;
is kept for them with our Lord in the kingdom of heaven,
as can be recognized from the understanding of the blessings
which He especially pronounced in His gospel. In these bles-
sings He has touched a variety of ways of behaviour [from
which it appears] that for every man who walks to Him, in
whatever measure on whatever way, the gate of the kingdom
of heaven is open. But the word 'Except ye be converted
528 and become as little children' means that here man perceives
the delight of the kingdom. The kingdom of heaven is said
to be spiritual contemplation. And this is not found by the
labours of the deliberations, but it is tasted by grace. And
before a man has become pure, he is not able even to hear.
Because it is not acquired by learning. If thou readiest purity,
my son, which is acquired through the faith of the heart and
by reclusion from men, and thou forgettcst the knowledge of
this world and doest not perceive it, then [spiritual contempla-
tion] suddenly is found within thee, without inquiring after it.
Erect a pillar and pour oil upon it 2 ), and thou wilt find thy
treasure within thee.
If, however, thou art entangled in the snares of psychic
knowledge, I have no objection to say that it will be easier
to thee to escape from iron bonds than from it. And thou
wilt never be far from the snares of seduction, and thou wilt
1) Matth. 18,3 2J Cf. Ccn. 2S, iS

TUTS CILU'TI-R IS FULL OK LII-'K 355
never be able to find and to have freedom of speech and con-
fidence unto our Lord. And at all times thou wilt walk on
the edge of the sword and thou wilt not be able absolutely
to be without suffering- l
).
1 ake refuge with weakness and sincereness, that thou mayest
live beautifully before God, and that thou mayest be without
fear, bor as the shadow follows the bodies, so does mercy follow
humility. Therefore, if thou wishest to be connected with these,
529 do not give room any-how to weak deliberations. If all injuries
and evils and dangers surround thee and make thee fear, do not
care to look at them or to think of them. If once thou believest
that God is able to guard and to govern thee, and if thou
followest him, then do not further care for anything like these.
But say to thyself: All-sufficient is He to whom thou hast once
entrusted thyself. I am not near [to anything], but He knows it.
Then thou wilt see indeed the wonders of God, namely
how near His salvation always is to those who fear Him;
and that His care surrounds them, though it is invisible. And
though the guardian which is with thee is invisible to the
bodily eyes, yet thou shalt not doubt his existence. Sometimes
he reveals himself also to the bodily eyes, for the sake of thy
confirmation. But when man has thrown away all visible help
and human hope and clings to God in faith and with a clear
heart, then at once grace will cling to him and reveal in
him its force by various [acts of[ help. At first it shows its
help m manifest things, also in bodily ones, by its care of him,
in order that by these things he may the better be able to
perceive the power which is in God's care of him, and that
by insight in manifest things he may become confirmed in
hidden ones, as is becoming to his childlike mind and his
lack of training. How then?
It is to be compared with this, for instance, that a man's
want is prepared for him without labour, without his bestowing
care on it. So grace causes him to escape many accidents
53o which often come near him and which are full of danger. And
while^ he has no anxiety before them because he docs not
perceive them, grace disposes of them in a very wonderful
way, as also the other things which suddenly assail him, with-
out his thinking how often injury to the soul and also to the
1) Affection?

356 THIS CHAPTER IS FULL OF LIFE
body may proceed from them. And it preserves him against them,
as a nurse who gives him shade and spreads her wings over
her sons, that no harm may approach unto them. And at the
same time it causes him to perceive that which happened, sho-
wing him what threatened to destroy him, by the yees of the
body, and the actual help of God, in a clearway; and the disso-
lution ofhis life which was near and from which God saved him.
So [grace] instructs him, also in hidden things. And it re-
veals to him the ambushes of thoughts and of deliberations
difficult to understand. So he will easily attain to their under-
standing and their mutual relation and seduction, which is re-
lated to which, and how one is born from the other and des-
troys the soul. And the whole ambush of the demons is laid
open before him, and the cover of their deliberations, and
what is related to every one of them.
And [grace] provides him with insight, so that he under-
stands what will happen. Then in his sincereness dawns a
hidden light so that he perceives everything and the force of
the emotions of — subtle deliberations. It show — s him as it were
with its finger if he did not know this what is going
to happen to him. And then this is born in him, that he asks
from his governor, in prayer, all things small and great.
531 And when grace, by all these things, has confirmed his mind
in confidence on God, then it begins to introduce him gradu-
ally into temptations. And it admits unto him those tempta-
tions the difficulty of which his degree is able to bear. And by
such a temptation it adduces unto him its help in an apper-
ceptive way, in order to strengthen his courage, till, gradually,
he acquires training and wisdom and despises his enemies
through confidence in God.
For it is impossible for a man, without these, to become
prudent in spiritual struggles and to recognize his governor
and to perceive his God, and to become secretly confirmed in
his hope, by the force which he has received personally through
experience. And as often as [grace] sees that the deliberation
of presumption begins to move somewhat in him, and that he
begins to think great things of himself, it allows the tempta-
tions to become strong and powerful against him, so that he
recognizes his weakness and flees and seeks refuge with God
in humility.
By these things man reaches the degree ofperfect man, through

THIS CHAPTER IS FULL OF LIFE 357
faith and hope in the son of God to whom he is lifted up in
love. For in a wonderful manner God's help unto man is recog-
nized when he is surrounded by circumstances full of despair,
and God shows there His power by delivering" him from them.
Never has man experienced the divine power in rest and comfort,
and never has He shown His action in an apperceptive manner
except in a lonely place or in the desert or in places not visited
by men and free from the disturbance of their habitation.
532 Be not astonished if, when thou beginnest [to practice] ex-
cellence, severe troubles rise against these from all sides. For
excellence is not to be deemed to involve that its practice is
not combined with difficulty and labours. Excellence has re-
ceived its denomination from this, says the holy Euagrius.
Usually difficulties make front against this alertness, and ex-
cellence is to be rejected when it is combined with comfort,
says the blessed Marcus, the solitary.
All excellence whatever, is called the cross, because it ac-
complishes the order of the spirit. For all those who desire
in the fear of God to live in Jesus Christ, are assailed by
troubles. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his cross and follow me. Whoever would save his
life in comfort, loses it ; and who gives up his life for my sake,
finds it1 ). Therefore our Lord has placed before thee the cross,
that thou mightest pronounce death on thy soul and there-
upon cause it to follow Him.
There is nothing so strong as despair. It does not know
how it can be defeated by anything belonging to those of the
right or to those of the left hand. When a man in his mind
has given up his life, none is more courageous than he is,
and there is no enemy who is able to meet him, and there
is no trouble the fame of which can weaken his mind. For
any trouble whatever is inferior to death, and he has resolved
to take death upon himself.
533 If in every place and in every work and at all times con-
cerning all things which thou art going to perform thou placest
labour and pain as an example for the mind, thou wilt not
only be found always courageous and undaunted to thwart all
reputed difficulty, and by the vigour of the deliberations to
put timidity to flight which usually rises therefrom that deli-
1) Matlh. 16,24

038 THIS CHAPTER IS FULL OF LIFE
berations look for comfort, but also all hard and difficult things
which meet thee will seem to thee easy and light.
How often thy will is thwarted by what thou expectcst, though
perhaps these things do not reach thee. For thou knowest that
the expectation of comfort always withholds men from great
profit and from excellent good, so that even those who live
in the world with their fleshly dealings cannot accomplish their
wish if they do not resolve in their mind to bear difficulties.
And because experience is witness to this, persuasion with words
is not necessary. And in all preceding generations till now
there is nothing which makes men despair of victories a — nd
checks them from exellent practice and which makes them
—
to say it in one word despise to enter into the kingdom,
as the expectation of the small comfort which is near. And
not only this, but many times this aspect is the cause of se-
vere accidents and hard temptations to every man whose mind
is directed towards it and whose deliberations move unto it;
534 because his governor is the will of desire. Who does not know
that also the bird by the aspect of comfort draws near the
snare? Perhaps our knowledge, as compared to that of a bird,
is much inferior, concerning the hidden things and the acci-
dents which are hidden in things and actions and places and
various things. And also Satan, from the beginning, tries to
ensnare us by promises and the prospect of comforts.
Now that my mind is occupied with the subject of desire, by
the words I have written, I have erred away from the scope which
I had indicated above, viz. that at all times we must place the
aspect of troubles before our mind, in all that we wish to begin
in the path of our Lord, so that it reach its end duly.
How many times, when a man wishes to begin some work
for the Lord, he asks whether there is comfort in the thing,
or whether it is possible to accomplish it easily, without la-
bour, or whether there is any "thing in it to trouble the body.
Are not above and beneath names of comfort? What doest
thou say, o man ? Doest thou wish to ascend unto heaven and
to receive the Kingdom which is there and communion with
God and spiritual comforts and that blessedness and mingling
with the angels, and immortal life!5 And doest thou ask whe-
ther there is trouble in this way? How astonishing are those
who desire the things of this world and the riches which are
to be destroyed and the dominion which will be dissolved. They

THIS CHAPTER IS FULL OF LIFK 359
walk on the difficult waves of the sea and the)' tread frightful
;
ways; they bear a long course full of labours and troubles,
535 and other mournful things which men are wont to perform for
the sake of their desire and they do not deliberate at all
;
whether there is labour in the matter or vexation in what they
wish to do; whereas we always inquire after comforts.
U we always in our mind take upon us the way of cruci-
fixion and always comply with the crucifixion, what difficulty
then should not be easier than it? Does there exist any one
at all who is not acquainted with this, that no man has ever
won a victory in battle and received a perishable crown, or
has administered divine actions, or has succeeded in any of
the glorious things of excellence, or has got the desire of his
will even in things not laudable, without having undertaken
first labours and troubles or without having pushed away
alluring thoughts of comfort that gave birth to dejection and
pusillanimity and caused relaxation in all things? But when
the min — d is zealous in behalf of excellence, th — e outward
senses smell, touch, hearing, sight and taste do not
know what it means to be vanquished by the severe shocks
caused by foreign influences lying outside the course and
dominion of the power of nature.
When anger influences [a man] naturally, then bodily life
appears more despicable than dung. When however the heart
is spiritually zealous, the body does not suffer by troubles,
nor does it shrink from terrible things. But the mind faces all
temptations being like diamond in its endurance.
536 Let us also be zealous with a spiritual zeal for the sake of
the will of Jesus, then all dejection which causes relaxation in
the mind will be driven away from us. For zeal causes cou-
rage and firmness of soul and soundness of body. What power
is there in the demons when the soul moves its zeal against
them with natural vigour?
Resolution too is said to be the offspring of zeal. And all
immoveable vigour which is born in the soul when it sets its
powers to work, is implanted in it by zeal. Also the crowns of
confessorship which the victorious martyrs receive on account
of their endurance are born by this twofold influence of zeal
and resolution which have their origin in the power of natural
anger, [and thus the martyrs] become apathetic against the
vehement suffering in vexations.

360 ON TIIK PROFIT ARISING] FROM TIIK FLIGHT ETC.
[
LXXVIII
ON THE PROFIT [ARISING] FROM THE FLIGHT FROM
THE WORLD THE METHOD OF WHICH HAS BEEN
THOUGHT OUT BY THE FATHERS THROUGH PRU-
DENT EXAMINATION
Strong indeed and difficult and very hard is the struggle
which arises when things are near. And though a man may
be excellent and vigorous, when things causing battles and
strife are near, fear clings to him. Then he falls easier than
when Satan personally meets him in battle. For when a man
537 is not far from those things which the heart is afraid of, the
fiend has constantly the opportunity [to assail him]. And if it
happens that he sleeps a while, the fiend can easily destroy
him. For there the body is in clanger of being injured, at any
rate it has to be kept afar from sin. But here it is the soul
that receives an invisible blow and it cannot fatigue the fiend
so that he gives up fighting against it. For these things are
of themselves able to move against it the disturbance of struggle
at any time. And willingly it lets itself be captivated by them,
without any one arousing strife against it from without. But
the soul is in strife with itself through the allurements of those
things which are arranged before the senses of the body, as
has been said somewhere; for as soon as the soul is cap-
tivated by the injurious meetings with the world, these meetings
become stumbling-blocks to it; or, as has also been said: The
soul is naturally vanquished, when it meets those things.
Therefore, because the ancient saints who have walked in
these ways knew that the mind is not always healthy so as
to be able to remain in one attitude, without deviation, and
vigilant, because there is a time that the soul becomes enve-
loped in darkness wi — thout being able to look at those things
which cause injury they have examined prudently and
[resolved to] put on renunciation, as a weapon. For it frees
from many struggles, as has been written. For some have
escaped from sins, through their poverty and have migrated
towards the desert where there is nothing to cause affections,

1
ON TILF PROFIT ARISING] FROM TIIK FLIGHT ETC. 36
[
so that, when a time comes when they are weak, nothing is
found to give occasion to fall.
538 1 say : anger and desire and rancour and glory and the like
are slight, because of the desert, and by it [those solitaries]
were protected as by an invincible tower. Then every one of
them was able to accomplish his strife in solitude, there where
the senses found no support so as to become fiends by inju-
rious meetings. Better for us is death in our struggle, than
life with falling.
LXXIX
HOW THE HIDDEN IMPULSES VARY ALONG WITH
THE VARIATION OF OUTWARD BEHAVIOUR
As long as a man clings to renunciation [the thought of]
departure from this life is continually alive in his mind. And
every hour he meditates on the life after resurrection, con-
triving to prepare what is necessary for that state. And a
contempt for all honour and comfort of the body is sown in
his mind, and the thought of the baseness of the world moves
in him at all times. And he is courageous and always pos-
sesses the heart of a hero in all fear and danger threatening
death. For he is not afraid even of death, because he perpe-
tually looks at it very near from a short distance and expects
it. And his care is cast on God, with full, undoubting confidence.
And when troubles oppose him, he, as a man that knows
assuredly that they will prepare crowns for him, bears them
with perfect joy, while his soul rejoices and exults when receiving
539 them. For he knows that it is God who sends them, because
of the profits of things which remain unknown, in the hidden
acts of providence. But when it happens that on account of
some cause some transitory thing falls to his lot by the action
of him that cunningly devises all evils, at once love of the
body begins to stir in his soul and he thinks of a long life
and deliberations connected with bodily comfort germinate in
him every moment. But, if possible, he witholds his body from
being hurt by anything. And he contrives all things which can
be utilized for the comfort of the body, and becomes wanting
in that freedom which is not subject to any deliberation of
fear, and consecpiently bestows his care and deliberation on

362 HOW TIIK HIDDEN IMPULSES VARY ALONG KTC.
all these things, namely the emotions that cause fear and the
things that produce terror. For the courage of the heart has
been taken away from him, which he possessed in his soul
while he was exalted above the world by his renunciation. And
now that he has become an inheritor of the world, in accord-
ance with the quantity of his possession he also has received
fear for the law and the provision allotted to him by God.
For the side to the service of which we prepare our mem-
bers, is that to which we become servants with a submission
involving" total fear, according to the word of the Apostle v
).
Anterior to all affictions is self-love. Anterior to all virtues
is that a man despise comforts. He that feeds his body with
comforts, is troubled in the place of peace. He that indulges
in luxury in his youth, will become a slave and sigh at the end.
540 As it is impossible that he, whose head is bound within the
dark 3 ) bosom of the water, should smell the subtle air which
is poured out into this empty bosom, so it is not possible that
he whose mind is immersed in earthly care, should perceive
with the smell of his soul the clear air of the new world. As
the smell of a deadly poison disturbs the constitution of the
body, so does pernicious sight disturb the peace of the mind.
As it is not possible that health and illness should be in
one body without one being destroyed by the other, so it is
not possible that money and love be in one house without one
destroying the other. As it is not possible that glass remains
whole in the neighbourhood of stone, so it . is not possible
that a saint should continually seek the sight of or discourse
with a woman and that his purity should remain immaculate.
As trees are eradicated by the perpetual blows 3 of violent
)
waters, so is the love of the world [eradicated] from the heart
by the violence of temptations assailing the body. As 1 solvent
)
drugs purify the body from bad humours, so does the force
of troubles purify the heart from affections. As it is not pos-
sible that a dead man should perceive the things of life, so
the soul of a solitary, who is buried in solitude as in a grave,
is exempt from the storm which usually blows on account of
the apperception of things which pass among men. As it is
not possible for him that spares his adversary in the field of
541 battle to avoid blows, so it is not possible that a champion
1) Cf. Rom. 8,15 2) litt.: thick 3) r<i&lCV.M 4) Introduction

;
HOW TIIK HIDDEN IMPULSES VARY ALONG ETC. 363
should spare his body and that his soul should be saved from
destruction. As childhood, when terrified by frightful sights runs
to seek refuge at the skirts of its parents, so the soul, when
troubled by the terror of temptations, hastens towards God to
seek shelter in perpetual beseechings. And as temptations as-
sail, to the same extent it multiplies its beseechings. But when
it has free-space, it expands itself in distraction.
As those who are handed over to the judges in order to
be scourged on account of their evils, become humble and
immediately confess their faults, when they come suddenly be-
fore the scourges, so that their punishment is lessened and
they are soon delivered through the agency of small troubles,
but others of them are foolish and obstinate and their scour-
ging is augmented and at last, after much scourging, with la-
cerated backs, they confess against their will, without gaining
any profit- so when we are handed over from divine mercy
unto justice, for the faults to which we have become accus-
tomed without returning to the [goodj direction, and the Judge
of the world orders us to stretch ourselves before the rod ot
temptations, lest our scourging in the world to be, become
heavy ; if, as soon as the rod of the Judge approaches us, we
humble ourselves and recollect our forfeits and confess before
the avenger, we shall soon be saved by small temptations
but if we become obstinate in troubles, and confess not that
we were the cause of them ourselves and that we have de-
542 served even more than these, and if we vituperate men and
sometimes demons and sometimes even God's justice and as-
sume the attitude of victors though we do not think and say
that our works are like theirs, and if we do not think of the
fact that God knows and recognizes us better than we do
ourselves, and that the judgment of the Lord is over the whole
earth and that no man is chastised without His orders, then
our distresses assail us as they come, and our trouble becomes
violent, and they hand us over the one to its fellow as in a
chain, till we know ourselves and become humble and per-
ceive our sins ; for without apperception it is not possible for
us even to come to [good] direction ; then at last when we
have suffered many troubles, we confess our sins in a confes-
sion without profit and without gathering from it any conso-
lation. And also this that a man perceives his sins, is a gift
which is allotted by God to the mind, when He sees that one

364 HOW THE HIDDEN IMPULSES VARY ALONG ETC.
has been fatigued by various temptations, lest he depart this
world under all these distresses and troubles, without profit;
and [also this is a gift : to perceive] that we have not lacked
insight on account of obstinacy, but on account of ignorance.
Some depart this world under these circumstances, without
confessing that they are guilty, but litigating and vituperating.
God, however, who is compassionate, looks to whether they
humble themselves, that He may forgive them and give them
expansion. Not only that He will put an end to their temp-
tation, but He will even forgive their sins at a faint confession
of their heart.
As a man who offers a large offering to the king and tries
543 to make his face benignant, so he that sheds tears in prayer
before God, the king of all the worlds, makes to pass away
all the degrees of his sins, and is even granted to see His
face beingnant. As the lamb that leaves the pen, and in its
error comes before the den of the wolves, so is the solitary
who separates himself from the communion of his fellows un-
der the pretext of lonely dwelling, and constantly visits spec-
tacles and the distraction of the town.
As a man who bears on his shoulder a pearl of great price
and goes on an ill-famed way so that he is in perpetual fear
of being robbed, so is he that bears the pearl of chastity
and walks in the world the way of the enemies. Before he
enters the chamber of the grave, which is the place of confi-
dence, it is not to be expected that it will escape robbers and
pluderers. Perhaps he that is not afraid, is able [to go that
way] even this man does not know either, on which spot or
;
from where or at which moment he will suddenly be assailed
and robbed of his hope. Some are robbed at the gate of their
house, namely in old age.
As a man who drinks wine at the time of mourning and
gets drunk and forgets all the suffering of his sorrow, so is
he that, having got drunk by the love of God in this world
which is a place of wailing, forgets his sorrow and all his
distress and, through his drunkenness, becomes apathetic against
all the affections of sin.
Whose heart is supported by hope in God, his soul is a
swift beast of wings. He whose spirit is at all times exalted
above the earth and who flies above the sky with the thoughts
544 of his deliberations, and is in continual prayer, is as a man

HOW THE HIDDEN IMPULSES VARY ALONG ETC. 365
who has the wind as his driving animal, so that his enemy
cannot reach him. Every time the latter seeks to join him,
he flies away from him.
As a man who has an advocate in the court of justice, so
is he that is compassionate to the troubled ones.
As a man who is amidst dangerous storms on the ocean
and casts his utensils from the ship, so is he that despises
the hindrances on his godly way in this world which is an
ocean ready to suffocate him.
Hindrances will not fail. What doest thou in a house which
is not thine ? The sight of a corpse ought to be for thee an
Why
instruction concerning thy departure from here. doest
thou multiply bonds to thyself? Gain thy life before thy light
grow dim and thou seek help without finding it. This life
has been given thee for repentance ; do not spend it with
various things.
The cross is the gate of mysteries ; here takes place the
entrance of the mind unto the knowledge of the heavenly
mysteries. The knowledge of the cross is hidden within the
sufferings of the cross. And in accordance with communion
with them is the apperception of the cross, according to the
word of the Apostle1 The greater place the suffering of Christ
).
takes in us, the greater becomes our consolation in Christ.
Consolation means contemplation, which is psychic sight. Sight
gives birth to consolation. It is not possible that our soul
produce spiritual fruits, except when our heart is dead to the.
world. For the Father quickens the soul that has died the
death of Christ, in contemplation of all the worlds.
Another observation. If thou diest not to the world, the
545 spiritual Adam will not be quickened in thee. When a man,
by being offered spiritually, dies to all dealings of this dwelling-
place, and trusts his life to the life after the resurrection,
Grace will dwell with him. And his behaviour is spiritually
strengthened. And when he hates the world, he perceives the
behaviour of the new man who is exalted above the filth of
human habitation and is deemed worthy of divine revelations.
It is not possible for us to be dead to the world in the
world, as long as our mind desires comforts, and the world,
by its affairs, is placed before our senses and by apperception
1) Cf. Philipp. 4,10

366 IfOVV THE HIDDEN IMPULSES VARY ALONG ETC.
renews recollection and incites the body unto seeking- what it
wishes, by close contact with [worldly] things, by sight, hearing,
touch, smell and taste.
The soul's being" dead to the world is the heart's being
free from the thought of its recollections and the soul's being
void of the deliberations concerning [worldly] things and the
will being cut off from the love of thinking- upon them.
For it is not possible that our heart be in peace exalted
above disturbance and in serenity of love lifted up above the
world, when there are poured out into it recollections that
renew through meeting's with things by the senses, their recep-
tacles. The mortification of the soul to the world cannot be
acquired, if not the body be also beyond apperception and
sieht of things.
LXXX
ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS OF
546
LABOURS DURING THEM AND THAT IT IS NOT BE-
COMING THAT THE AIM OF OUR LABOURS SHOULD
BE THE FULFILLING OF A QUANTITY BUT [TO WORK]
IN FREEDOM AND WITH DISCRIMINATION AS CHIL-
DREN OF GOD WHO WORK WITH THEIR FATHER
IN THE ALERTNESS OF LOVE AND HOW PRECIOUS
THE LABOUR OF VIGILS IS MORE THAN THAT OE
ALL OTHER DUTIES AND WHAT THIS LABOUR
IMPOSES ON THOSE WHO CHOOSE IT AND HOW
THEY HAVE TO WALK IN IT AND ON THE GIFTS
OF WHICH THEY ARE DEEMED WORTHY BY GOD
AND ON THE BATTLES AGAINST THEM ON THE
PART OF THE PRINCIPAL OF THIS WORLD
When thou desirest to rise for the service of thy vigils,
then, with the help of our Lord, do as I say to thee. Bend
thy knees as usually, and rise. Then do not begin with thy
service at once. But when thou hast prayed 'find concluded
and signed thy heart and thy limbs with the livjng sign, rise
for a short time, in silence, till thy senses are at rest and thy
emotions in peace. Then lift up thy inward gaze towards our
Lord and beseech Him passionately that He may support thy

:
ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC. 367
weakness. And let the words of thy tongue and the emotions
of thy heart be to the pleasure of His will. And say thus,
quietly in the prayer of thy heart My Lord and my God,
:
maker of thy creation, to whom our affections are revealed
as well as the weakness of our nature and the strength of
our fiend, do Thou guard me against his wickedness, for his
power is strong and our nature is wretched and our strength
is weak. Thou art benignant who art acquainted with our
547 weakness and bearest the difficulties of our illness guard me
;
from the disturbance of deliberations and the vehemence of
affections and make me worthy of this holy service. Lest 1
spoil its taste by my affections and be found audacious before
Thee. But with pure deliberations and in clearness of thought
let me stand before Thee, as is beautiful to Thy holiness, for
the splendour of which the chariot with the Seraphs, who
sanctify and praise the holiness of Thy being with vibrating
hot emotions to their delight, are not sufficient.
And with these deliberations thy heart will suddenly be
opened by grace and thou wilt shed tears at the beginning
of thy prayer. And thy deliberations will be purified by the
recollection of the Lord. And thy soul will receive quiet and
pure chastity. And while thy spirit is concentrated and pure,
thou wilt begin thy service, without disturbance, and thou
wilt continue it till the end, with delight.
It is becoming for us to continue our service, with complete
freedom, apart from all disturbing thoughts of youth. If we see
however that there is not much time and light dawns before
we have finished, we should leave out on purpose and con-
sciously one or two of the usual eulogies rather than to let
perturbancy spoil the taste of our service and disturb also the
Psalms of the morning.
If during thy service, a deliberation says to thee whisperingly
Hasten som — ewhat, let us do much work, then thou wilt soon
be ready do not look at it. If, however, it urges thee,
recite in inverse order some marmita's Y ) of the Psalter ; and
every sentence, the sense of which involves the sign of the
548 cross, repeat it many times ; and if it disturbs or troubles- thee
again then cease reciting Psalms, and kneel in prayer, and
:
say: I do not wish to count milestones, but I seek to enter
1) tenth pari

368 ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC.
the Apartment. Every way which leads me quickly to the
aim, I will go. The people who fashioned the calf in the
desert, walked forty years erring in the desert, went up and
down mountains and hills, but the promised land they did not
even see from afar.
And if, during thy vigils, long standing overcome thee by
its duration, and thou become weak by fatigue, and delibera-
tion say to thee, or rather that cunning one who speaks
through it as through the — serpent : Finish now, because thou
hast no strenght to stand then answer: Not so, but let us
sit down, this is much better than to sleep. For even though
I do not recite a Psalm, let my tongue be silent, while my
mind is occupied with prayer and intercourse with God. To
be awake is at any rate better than sleep.
Vigils do not wholly demand standing nor solely the reciting
of Psalms. But some spend the whole night with the recitation
of Psalms some with kneelings and passionate prayers and
;
humble prostrations on the earth; some with weeping and tears
and bewailing of their sins.
It is said concerning one of our Fathers, that for forty years
his prayer consisted in one sentence: I have sinned, as man;
do Thou as God forgive me. And the Fathers and bethren
549 heard him repeating this sentence, weeping passionately, with-
out ceasing. And this prayer alone, during night and day,
took for him the place of service.
Some pass a small part of the evening with the recitation
of Psalms and the rest of the night with songs and glorifi-
cations and hymns and other mournful melodies. Others assign
the hours of the night to liturgical recitations; and between
every two parts they enliven and enjoy themselves by reading
the Scripture. Others impose upon themselves the rule, that
they never shall bend their knees, not even in the prayer for-
ming the conclusion to a marmita1 ), though this is the custom
of those who practice vigils. But they pass the whole night
in one attitude.
Concerning one of the saints, therefore, it is said that be-
cause the demon of fornication made war against him and did
not neglect to use against him any means, he gave himself
to the labour of vigils and imposed upon himself the rule,
l) See above, p. 357, note

ON VIGILS AND ON TIIK MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC. 369
that he would never bend his knees, but stood the whole night,
his eyes open, without bending his knees, till morning.
All these distinctions are in the labour of vigils, and by
them the virtous put off the old man who is depraved by the
desires of seduction and put on Christ and are saved. On ac-
count of these kinds of labour performed in wisdom, the saints
are deemed worthy of ecstasy caused by divine revelation,
which is exalted above fleshly thought.
While the virtuous in their vigils enjoy such various kinds
55° of things, they pass, without dejection the whole space of the
long hours of night, while their soul exults and rejoices and
forgets the coat of flesh, woven from affections, with which
it was clad. And on account of the delight and the joy of
their heart, they do not remember sleep. For they imagine
themselves to have put off the body and to be already in the
state which comes after the resurrection. And in consequence
of their great joy, they leave their Psalms from time to time,
and they fall on their faces on account of the power of the
gladness which moves in their soul. And the whole long night
is to them as the day, and darkness as sunrise, on account of
the hope which elevates their heart and makes them drunk
with its thought and by the blazing of their mind which burns
by the recollection of future good. And while the tongue con-
tinually plays on the spiritual harp, mind is occupied with its
own things; sometimes it turns towards the understanding of
the sentences, sometimes it pushes away the foreign *) delibe-
ration which tries to enter in. Sometimes, when it becomes
weary, it turns towards the contents of the daily recitation.
And the recollection which it has gathered from it and col-
lected in its treasury, causes at these times emotions at which
the mind delights, so that there is no room at all for foreign
deliberations.
And then quickly the mind is drawn towards the under-
standing of prayer and Psalms, lest, by abiding too long —in
—
this state profitable though meditation upon them may be
it should be bereaved of discourse with God and the light of
contemplation which the mind is wonted to receive from prayer
without distraction in which it speaks in loneliness with its Lord
551 through the secrecy of the heart, in humility of deliberations.
1) p^lCU^^ proselyte
Vcrh. Afd. I.etterk. 1922 (Wensinck)

370 ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC.
In these and similar things they pass their whole lifetime,
every one of them pleasing- his Lord by his labours in accor-
dance with his degree and his power, in total application
of will.
If anyone, however, desire to give his body some rest, he
may finish and sit down [turned] towards the East. As long
however as he is sitting, he shall not allow his mind to be
idle but he shall meditate and think and deliberate on the
;
greatness of this duty ; and on what his performance is; and
how it is done, and how great his crown, and how glorious
the fruit of his labour is; and what watchfulness it demands;
and how the ancients have dealt with it, and of what things
they have been deemed worthy through the fulfilment of their
struggles and how by the mercy of Jesus he was turned from
;
the world, he that was occupied with vain labours the end of
which is destruction from God and reprehension through sins; and
how this mercy brought him to this performance of the angels,
the hope of which is averacious hope, and itsjoy is ajoy which is
beyond the power of distress and its confidence a confidence
which cannot be fallacious. For a man may work ever so
much, his labours are small compared with that which he will
receive at his end in the pledge of good things, to the delight
of his soul.
While these and similar deliberations are in his heart and
he is astonished at them he places his mind in the spiritual
chariot and lets it fly and be occupied with all the holy Fa-
552 thers of all generations, the inheritance of whose behaviour
he possesses, [thinking of] how every one of them has ac-
complished, with various districtions, this spiritual service and
;
of how they have abandoned the inhabited world and mankind
and have withdrawn themselves from the allurements of the
world and from the disturbancies of life and have gone and
hidden themselves in mountains and caverns and removed and
and lonely places, because they saw that this course of life
cannot be accomplished among men, on account of the many
hindrances and have become dead in their lifetime for the
;
sake of life in God, erring through desert places and between
rocks as those who have lost their way people [of such worth]
;
that every single one's glory is not equalled by the whole
world. Some of them lived on rough and steep rocks, some
at the foot of mountains, or in deep valleys; some in the

1
ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC. 37
caves of the ground and in caverns, as those who dig after
foxes in order to surprise then some in graves and on moun-
;
tain cliifs. Some have constructed a small hovel in the desert
and passed there the rest of their life ; some have built a
small pen on the top of a mountain, viz. a small cell, and
have dwelt therein with pleasure as if in a royal palace. And
because they did not care for their livelihood, they only thought
of how each of them should please God and accomplish his
struggle beautifully.
And what kind of a life did these saints lead in these places?
553 Did they live with the body, or a life above flesh and blood?
Did they not become pusillanimous in that total desert? Did
the power of endurance not abate during that long time, did
the body not become weak during that prolonged period,
through their being deprived of the use of natural needs?
How was human life preserved in them? And in all this, what
struggles have they endured and what troubles How strenu-
!
ously and without perturbance did they endure various difficult
wars in which the ev — il spirits assailed the — m ! How did they
not in their life time even till the end become relaxed
so as to neglect their difficult and wearying labours? How did
their spirit not become sorry through this utter loneliness, cut
off from all visible consolations? Is there really all this strength
in human nature and how did divine power preserve them
;
without injury, under all those various temptations ; and how
did it prepare for every one of them by various provisions,
in accordance with one's dwelling place, the fulfilling of the
need which was necessary for him? Some of them were sus-
tained by a bird. Behold, these last sixty years I have the
half of my bread from such a bird. Others are sustained by
some tree or palm in a supernatural way, as one of them has
said, viz. the bishop who repented in the desert. I am now
in this desert nine and forty years. God has granted me life
554 through this palm. And so it was with the saint who was in
his monastery, in a fallen state, for six months-, and who fled
and went unto the interior of the desert in order to repent
his sin. When his stomach ached through and through, the
angel came and cured him. Some are sustained by the beasts;
as that blessed one who dwelt in a cavern in the desert of
Sodom. Some, who are dwelling in the desert near the inhabited
world, are furnished by men, as that strenuous man whom

;
372 ON VICULS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC.
Serapion visited ; and as the blessed Martinianus who dwelt in
a lonely island and was visited by a merchant two times a year.
Where no habitation was near and there were no ways
whatever, [divine power] visited them through an angel, as is
said concerning the blessed Apelles who dwelt in the declivity
of a mountain in a small grotto. His work consisted therein
that he offered prayer to God during the whole day and a
hundred times during the night. His food, without care on his
part, came in the desert through an angel. He was clad in a
shirt, and on his head he wore a small cowl and these remained
;
on him in the desert, without becoming worn out. Doest thou
see, how God cares for his soldiers in every respect?
Others fed upon roots others upon eatable greens, which
;
grow of themselves others upon crops which had to be watered
•,
and upon dried vegetables, which are sown on purpose others
;
upon the fruits of trees. To others a bed of parsley and a
555 streaming well were sufficient for the wants of this ephemeral
life, in so far as the body is maintained by them, apart from
profitable recollections, which at these times are stirred by
grace, to the consolation of^ man.
When a man is occupied in his mind with these and similar
things, he becomes drunk as it were with living wine, and
forgets himself. Then he sees himself again and wonders that
during- the whole of this travel through the desert and during
the meeting with saints, no injury at all has met the mind.
And now it seems to him as if he were with those saints and
saw them manifestly. And on account of this recollection of
the behaviour of the saints which the mind imagines to itself
through the remembrance of their tales, and through medita-
tion upon them , dejection vanishes ; and languor is driven
forth; the limbs are strengthened; sleep is driven away from
the eyelids ; the spirit is strengthened and throws fear away
distraction is crushed heroically ; the mind is concentrated ; a
fervent heat burns in the heart and unspeakable joy arises in
the soul. Further sweet tears moisten the cheeks; spiritual
exultation makes the mind drunk; inexplainable consolations
are received by the soul hope supports the heart and streng-
;
thens it. Then it is to him as if he dwelled in heaven, during
his vigils that are so full o( good things.
By these and similar ways those proceed who perform vigils
with discrimination. For there is nothing which makes the mind

ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC. 373
556 pure and glad and enlightens it and expels evil deliberations so
that the soul exults, to such an extent as continual vigils do.
For this reason all the Fathers were persevering in this
labour of vigils, and clung to the rule of abiding awake in
the nights, during the whole course of their behaviour espe-
;
cially because they heard our Saviour in several places warning
us earnestly, by His living word Watch ye therefore and
:
pray always 1 ). And : Watch and pray that ye enter not into
temptation 2 ). And again: Pray and do not faint 3 ) and so
on. And it was not sufficient to warn us by words only,
but He gave us even an example in His person thereby that
He always honoured the practice of prayer above all other
things. And therefore He perpetually separated Himself, also
for prayer, not arbitrarily, but chose for time, night, and for
place, the desert ; that we, avoiding all crowds and tumult,
might be able to pray in solitude, as is becoming.
Also all the — revelations which happened to the saints, on
various subjects, whether — they served to make them prudent
or to common instruction usually happened to them during
the night and at the time of prayer. Therefore our Fathers
have received this elevated instruction concerning prayer as it
were from Christ and the state of waking during prayer they
;
chose in the first place, according to the order of the Apostle,
557 for solitude and reclusion from the whole world, in order that
they might be, without a break, in the vicinity of God, through
continual prayer. They fled into solitude not only lest anything
should prevent them from constant prayer, but lest any foreign
thing from without should hurt them and disturb their pure
mind, and their gladdening vigils should be troubled, which
are the light of the soul. They also fed themselves moderately
lest the vapour which rises from a full stomach should obscure
the mind so as to deprive it of its discriminating quiet and
take away the spiritual delight which is granted through prayer.
In short they were zealous in every respect that they might
:
be able to speak with God without a screen, as much as pos-
sible, the mind not being hindered by anything at all.
Therefore, because Satan knows, that all these good things
are collected in this wonderful performance which occupies the
place of the soul with regard to all the sundry members of
1) Luke 21,36 2) Matth. 26,41 3) 1 Thcss. 5,17

374 ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFKRFNT KINDS F.TC.
the body of excellence, he envies it more than all other duties
the which all men know by experience and there is nothing
in man at which he aims and against which he directs his
zeal, a — nd which he prepares himself to combate more than
vigils whether those of a solitary, or of a coenobite, or a
layman. Here he cannot but show himself openly, in manifest
war against man, without an intermediary, without perceiving
558 at all the gifts which those receive who perform vigils-, but
he envies them on account of their chaste habit of standing,
and through their perseverance, against sleep, in waking, and
glorifications, and singing of Psalms, and prayers and inclina-
tions, and stretching [of the hands], and prostrations, and lying
clown on the earth, and beseechings of the heart during the
whole night. He is especially envious because others He on
their beds as dead at whom he makes mock, according to his
pleasure, by sordid visions and impure phantasies, and immerses
them during the whole night as it were in mire by various
phantasies — during the heavy sleep that has its origin in a full
stomach whereas these depart hence with their soul unto
the waking- state of resurrection. And he sees them, though still
bound under the curtain of the body, while perpetually waves
of mortality assail them and they are confined b — y a life limited
under the government of the air of this world still showing
in their mortal nature a type of future behaviour.
A great power possesses prayer which is offered at night-
time, more than that offered in the day. Therefore all the
saints used to pray during the night, while they were com-
bating against the heaviness of the body and the sweetness
of sleep, and expelling bodily nature. As also the Prophet
says : I am weary with my groaning •, all the night make I my
bed to swim '), while he was sighing in passionate prayer,
from the depth of his heart. And further: I rose in the midst
of night to praise Thee because of Thy judgments, Thou
righteous one 2 For every request which they demanded from
).
559 God with power, they armed themselves with prayer in vigils,
and at once they received what they had asked.
There is nothing so feared, even by Satan, as prayer which
is offered during vigils. And even if it takes place with dis-
traction, it does not return fruitless, unless that which is asked,
1) Ts. 6,6 2) ?

ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC. 375
should be what is not becoming- Therefore he engages him-
.
self in severe, battle with them, in order to turn them away
from this performance, if possible, namely those who are con-
stantly at it. Those who are somewhat strengthened against
his evil stratagems, and have tasted the gifts of God which
are granted during vigils, and experienced personally the great-
ness of God's help which has presented itself to them, despise
him utterly, him and all his devices.
Therefore, more than the whole community of the church,
the order of the solitaries wages war with them, in the struggle
of prayer and vigils, in the first place, because they are free
from visible things in the second place, because of their con-
;
tinual solitude. For, because they are free from incitements,
he is not able to turn away their deliberations from the thought
of God and to detain them from continual beseechings, in
their war against him, so that from the beginning of their ap-
prenticeship till their old age they do not neglect the labour
of vigils in any way, but it is a performance well known to
them, to stand during the whole night even as we learn from
;
the written stories of every one of them.
560 For Mar Athanasius, says in his story on the mirror of the
solitaries1 ), that he kept vigils plentifully, so that he passed the
main part of the nights without sleep. x L\nd it was in this point
that Satan found an occasion to wage his first battle against
the victorious one; and this happened while he was still a boy.
We
often read in many stories, that he did not neglect vigils
during his whole lifetime, as he did not even when he visited
others-, as for instance, when he went to see the blessed Fa-
ther Paul, when they ate their meal [furnished to them] through
a bird, and stood in prayer during the whole night. Which of
the saints, though possessing all the virtues together, could
neglect this duty, and not be rockened to be idle without
it? For this is the light of the mind. By it the intellect is
elevated and the spirit concentrated, the mind flies [on high]
and gazes at spiritual things and becomes young and illumi-
nated in prayer. By it the goods of future life, and the pre-
sents the mysteries of which are indicated in the holy scrip-
tures are given as a pledge. Therefore our Fathers did not
1) Athanasius in his Epistola ad Monuchos docs not speak of vigils. Or is Euagrius'
work meant here?

376 ON VIGILS AND ON THE MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC.
neglect this labour from the beginning of their apprenticeship
till [they reached] the measure of perfection, so that, even at
the time of old age which when a man can hardly stand
on his feet, they did not let languor gain power over them-
selves so as to detain them from continual vigils by giving their
5fil bodies rest in a short sleep
;
as we also learn from the stories
which are told concerning that perfect image of excellence and
of all spiritual beauties, I mean the blessed Arsenius. When
that famous man of Skete had withdrawn himself from all in-
tercourse with men and removed his dwelling-place to a long
distance even from the brethren, he gave himself wholly to
the wonderful performance of vigils. His standing during
vigils differed also from that of all the Fathers of his time.
To which also his story is witness. On the evening before
Sunday he set his back to the sun and stretched his hands
unto heaven, till the sun rose before him. Again in another
place: he passed the whole night in vigils; and when, towards
morning he wished to take rest, because nature demanded it,
while he struggled with sleep, he said Go and leave me,
:
evil maid. And so he expelled sleep quickly and remained
awake. And this happened at that high age, concerning which
it is said that it had bent him.
And in order that his assiduity in vigils may better be
known, let us hear another story concerning him; how he per-
severed during all his old age and weakness, a man ninety
562 years old. Once he called two of his disciples, who were highly
esteemed Fathers, and said to them Because the demons
:
struggle with me and 1 am not sure that they will not betray
me during sleep, [come and] labour with me this night in vi-
gils, and guard me and look whether I fall asleep during
vigils. So one sat down at his right hand and one at his left,
from the evening till the morning. [Afterwards] they said: We
have slept and waked, but we have not seen him sleeping at
all. And when dawn began, whether he assumed such an at-
titude as to make us believe that he slept, or whether sleep
really overwhelmed him, we do not know. Three times [we
heard| his breath leave his nostrils, then he rose and said to
us: I have slept, did I not? We answered and said to him:
We do not know it, for we have slept.
In these delightful labours of vigils those rejoiced who were
the leaders of our course. What then was the delieht which

ON VIGILS AND ON THIf: MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC. 37/
the glorious Arsenius gathered from this vexation with which
he tortured his body to such an extent? It is clear that he
did not vainly persevere in all these things. For we see that
not only his inner man became enlightened on account of his
delight, by the exalted ray, but also his outward man, which
is material and corruptible nature, was clad with the glory
with which all the saints will be clad in the end, on account
of the variation which the whole inner nature ofmen undergoes.
563 Wherefrom do we learn this? Once one of the brethren
went to the cell of Aba Arsenius and looked through the
window and saw the Father standing who was wholly as bur-
ning fire. For this brother who had cjone to see the Father,
was worthy of this sight he did not belong to the small but
:
to the great ones. The blessed one was famous on account of
his exalted behaviour and all Fathers desired to see him. And
because they especially desired to see him, [it was] as Aba
Macarius said to him Why doest thou flee from us There-
: !
fore the strangers who came to Ske — te desired chiefly to see
him and to receive his blessing. When that brother
knocked at his door, the Father came outdoors. And when he
saw that his visitor was astonished at what he saw, he said
to him: Was it time for thee to knock? Hast thou seen any-
thing? The other answered: No. So he dismissed him.
And what shall I say concerning the blessed Pacomius? The
counterpart of the former, and among others the chief, the
valiant in strife, the fervent and heroic in his vigils, the man
who passed a long time fighting against the demons as a
glorious champion, in the way of the holy Antonius, who, be-
cause many demons used to come to him during the nights,
asked God during his vigils that He might free him from
sleep, so that night and day he should be without sleep, so
as to be able to subdue the power of the Fiend. As it has
564 been said : Let me not turn my back before having crush — ed
them, for they are powerless against the faith of the Lord.
Then this gift was granted him, as he had asked, for a long
—
time. And be cause his heart was pure the sight of his
soul — having been purified through vigils and solitude and pra-
yer he saw God, who is invisible, as it were in a mirror.
These are the fruits of vigils, and these are the boons of
those who perform them, and these are the crowns [granted
on account of persevering in] this struggle.

;
378 ON VIGILS AND ON THK MANY DIFFERENT KINDS ETC.
Thou also, o brother, if thou desirest to be the fellow ofthese
saints and an heir of their behaviour, cling to solitude, with-
out dejection, that thou also mayest persevere in the work of
prayer without a break. Bear its troubles, in order to acquire
its good. And if thy body should be bent down by different
reasons and desist from labour, and thou shouldst not be able
to accomplish the works of solitude as usual, and thou shouldst
begin to be despised by thy heart and to become dejected
—
and worried because this is the work of the heart, especi-
ally for those who have the — right intention : not to desist from
reprehending and reproving do not say: Woe to me, that
I am idle, and it would be better for me to be in the world
and to perform any work whatever, and not possess an idle
reputation of solitude and reclusion, and yet to cease from
performance, being a solitary and lonely, yet afar from duties.
565 Do not say this. For God's lovingkindness bears the load
of our weakness He asks man from what he has, and He
;
knows us better than we do ourselves what our strength is.
When thy strength is sufficient, work. And even if thou
art not able to perform but little, thou must bear with joy
the laziness of thy solitude and be patient. And thou must
know that, if thou leavest solitude, even the thought will not
stay with thee which causes thee to be chastised by thy con-
science on account of laziness. On the contrary many circum-
:
stances will injure thee on account of distraction and laxity of
the senses, which destroy even that which has been performed
by thee before, because the grace of solitude has been taken
from thee. And thou wilt fall into temptations and many cir-
cumstances will befall thee, of which thou didst not think.
If thou doest fall into temptations, do not despair. For there
is no merchant who travels on seas and roads without suffering
losses; and there is no husbandman who simply reaps the whole
and there is no champion who suffers not blows and strokes
even if he gains victory in the end. So in the things of God,
in the things of the merchants who go this invisible road,
there are profits and losses, blows and victory. When thou art
hit, do not turn thy back. Pardon me.

AN ANSWER TO A BROTHER WHO HAD ASKKD ETC. 379
LXXXI
AN ANSWER TO A BROTHER WHO HAD ASKED HIM
566
WHY WHEN OUR LORD HAS DEFINED MERCY AS
SIMILITUDE TO THE GREATNESS OF THE FATHER
IN HEAVEN THE SOLITARIES HONOUR SOLITUDE
MORE THAN IT? AND AN APOLOGY OF THIS POINT
AND THAT IT IS NOT BECOMING TO NEGLECT THE
DISTRESSED AND SICK WHEN THEY ARE NEAR
It is well that thou hast brought forward from the Gospel
a comparison and a tested example for the great duty of
solitude, as if we were opponents to it or tried to reject it
as something superfluous. For our Lord has defined mercy as
the similitude to the Father by which those who perform it,
can approach Him. This is true. And we, the solitaries, do not
honour solitude without mercy, though we try to remain far
from care and trouble, as much as possible. Not that we deny
necessary things, when they present themselves, but we care
for solitude, because in it we are constantly with God in lonely
intercourse, by which it is more possible to be purified from
perturbance and to approach unto quiet of mind, though such
cases are rare. But when it is necessary, we will not neglect
mercifulness, compelling ourselves perpetually to be inwardly
full of mercy toward all kinds of rational beings, at all times.
For so the doctrine of our Lord orders, and this is the
distinction of our solitude, and it is not due to— fortune. So
567 none of us neglects to show this inward virtue, — when the
time corresponds with the work and the necessity making
known his love openly, by deeds; especially those who have
not laid themselves wholly under the rule of solitude do so.
But solitude to such ones means that they never meet anyone,
except once a week. They have not cut themselves off, by
the definition of their rule, from showing their fellow man
deeds of mercy ; only that one does so who is very devoted
and solitary so that he avoids the sight of men. For we know,
that without love of the fellow-man, the mind is not able to
become illuminated by intercourse with and love unto God.
Therefore, which of the says solitaries, who possessed food and

380 AN ANSWER TO A BROTHER WHO HAD ASKED ETC.
clothing, could see his neighbour hungry and naked and
persevere in withholding his hand?
Or which of them, when his brother according to the flesh
was sick and tormented and destitute of visitors, has honoured
the rule of his reclusion more than the life of his fellow, on
account of love of solitude?
Where, however, such circumstances, are not at hand, we
keep in mind love and mercy unto the fellow man. Where
practice is near, God demands from us plainly that we per-
form it actually.
5f)8 This is well known, that if we have acquired nothing, we
are not allowed to expose ourselves to care and disturbance
for the sake of the poor. But it is demanded of us [to give]
from what we have.
And when our dwelling place is far from the habitation of
men and from intercourse with and sight of them, it is not
necessary for us to leave our cell and our solitary and lonely
dwelling-place and proceed erring through the world in order
to visit the sick and to be occupied with similar practice. For
it is known that he that does so descends from greatness
to smallness.
If however the recluse live in the dwelling place of many
and is near to men through his constant dwelling with them,
—
and he can take rest when others are fatigued be he healthy
—
or ill it is incumbent upon him to occupy himself with
practice, without asking largely from others. But if he see the
brother according to the flesh and to profession, in trouble,
or rather: Christ rejected and vexed, — and he flee and hide
himself, pretending a sham solitude he that acts thus, is
without mercy.
Do not remind mc of John of Thebais and Arsenius and
the like. For who has given himself to such deeds and cared
for the sick or the poor, and has despised solitude? Do not
approach unto their stories. For if thou art far from all com-
fort and all meeting with men as they were, thou art allowed
to despise such works of [practice]. If however thou art far
569 from the state of the perfect and continually occupied with
bodily labours and occupations, why then doest thou despise
a commandment which suits thy measure, taking refuge with
the grand behaviour of the saints, a behaviour to which thou
art not near?

AN ANSWER TO A BROTHER WHO HAD ASKED ETC. 381
As to me, I will not neglect to cite the example of Maca-
rius the Great, which was written, as it were, to rebuke those
who despise their brethren. One clay he went to visit some
one who was sick. When he asked him whether he desired
anything, he answered : I want some fresh bread. Those soli-
taries, namely, usually baked bread for a year; so was the
custom of those places. Then that blessed man, who was ninety
years old, went from Skete the town of Alexandria, forty miles
and more, carrying with him dry bread in his cowl. There he
changed it and brought the sick what he desired.
And an other, who was his equal, did what is still greater,
a certain Agathon, exquisite above all the solitaries of his time,
a man who loved silence and solitude better than all others.
Once he went to a festival, in order to sell what he had
made with his hands. There he found a stranger, lying in the
street, sick. He hired a house and stayed with him, working
with his hands and making expenses on his behalf and paying
the hire of the house. So he served him for six months, till
the sick had recovered. Then he said, as the story runs, I
570 wished that I could find a leper and give him my body and
—
take his. This is perfect love let us resemble our Fathers,
;
that we may be thought worthy of grace, as they were.
Those who fear God, my beloved, are provided for so that
they keep the commandments of our Lord without difficulty,
even although that seems possible to them only through labours,
and danger is thought to be incurred for its sake. Christ has
defined and limited their totality to two commandments, which
make up the sum of them all. I mean the love of God, and
what He taught to be the like of this love unto His image.
:
The possession of the former is the aim of spiritual contem-
plation ; that of the second, of contemplation and practice.
Now, because God's nature is simple and not composite and
invisible and not subject to want, the heart in its occupation
equally does not require practice, nor bodily performance, nor
material motion. Its performance is simple, and, on account
of partial union in the [human] intellect, is in accordance with
the simple nature of its adorable cause, which is exalted above
the apperception of the senses and the flesh.
1 he second commandment, love of mankind, is to be accom-
plished in a double way, in accordance with its double nature.
I mean, that we accomplish it with the heart, invisibly, and

382 AN ANSWER TO A BROTHER WHO HAD ASKED ETC.
at the same time with the body, manifestly but those things
•,
which are accomplished by practice, happen also in secret and
in cooperation with the heart. —
For, as man's — nature is composed of two parts, namely
body and soul so all things regarding him are provided
571 in a double way, in accordance with the double character of
his constitution. As everywhere practice is anterior to con-
templation, so it is impossible for man to elevate himself unto
that elevated p»art , unless he has accomplished before , by
practice, that which is lower.
Therefore, let no one venture to speak concerning the ac-
quisition of love of his fellowmen, as if he possessed it already
in his soul, if the part is still wanting which has to be accom-
plished by the body, according to the opportunity for practice
granted by strength, time and place. Then by faith has to be
acquired that part of love which is received and recognized
by the heart. When, on account of these things, we have
been made ourselves known as faithful and true, as far as
possible, then power is given to the soul to stretch itself
towards the grand part of exalted and divine contemplation,
by means of simple emotions and without comparison.
Where man has no opportunity to fulfill love of his fellow
man practically by visible and by bodily things, it is sufficient
in the eyes of God, that we keep love of our fellowman with
our mind only, especially if we are able constantly to admi-
nister the service of that universal part, that is more excellent.
If however we are destitute of the totality of that universal
part, we should fill up this gap by the lower commandment,
namely by apperceptible practice, consisting therein that, ac-
cording to the time happening, we should provide for the com-
fort of our brethren, by wearying our body lest our liberty
;
572 become an opportunity for the flesh, in that we should occupy
ourselves with idle things under the pretext of lonely inter-
course. For it is known, that it is not allowed to demand
from him who is wholly deprived of human intercourse and
who is wholly occupied with God, being — dead to all beings
because of his being deprived of them that he should
serve men.
He, however, whose rule of solitude forbids intercourse ex-
cept on one day every week, and who, after the completion
of his rule, meeting and mingling and consoling himself with

AN ANSWER TO A BROTHER WHO HAD ASKED ETC. 383
man, neglects the trouble of his brethren and pretends to keep
the rule of his week of prohibition, is anathema. For it is
manifest that it is through a lack of mercy and on account
of presumption and fallacious deliberations that such a one
does not condescend to occupy himself with such things.
He that neglects the sick, shall not see light. And who
turns away his face from one in distress, may his day be dark.
And who despises the cry of the vexed, may the sons of his
house grope in darkness.
Let us not dishonour the great name of solitude by our
ignorance. Every duty has its time and place and distinction.
And then its service is accepted by God who knows all. The
service that deviates from this, is idle ; for all measures have
to be brought to completion.
He that hopes that he will be consoled and visited in his
misery by others, has to humble himself, so that he may be
of use to his fellow man when the latter is tempted. Then
during his service in solitude he may be joyful and free from
presumption and the seduction of the demons.
573 It has been said by one of the holy Fathers, Euagrius, one
of the initiated, that there is nothing which frees the solitary
from the demon of haughtiness and aids to the attainment of
the domain of chastity when the passion of fornication is
burning, as to visit those who are thrown on their bed and
vexed by bodily troubles. Great is the angelic service of soli-
tude, when it is mingled with such a discrimination, for hum-
bleness is needed. For wre arc plundered without our knowing it.
We have not said these things, my brethren, that we should
despise the duty of solitude; for we have everywhere insisted
upon it. We are not now found to contradict our own words,
and no one should pick out a single word from our argumen-
tation and take this in his hand without discrimination, neglecting
the rest. F"or I remember that in several places I have said
with emphasis, that if a man should happen to be in his cell
in total idleness, on account of the necessity of weakness, even
then he should not choose to leave it completely and to per-
form his service outside it rather than to be idle, within.
I have spoken of leaving the cell completely ; but if a neces-
sary practice presents itself, which demands some weeks, du-
ring which he may gain relief or the life of a fellow-man, he
should not deem this idleness. If there is anyone who thinks

384 AN ANSWKR TO A BROTHER WHO HAD ASKED ETC.
himself to be one of the perfect and exalted above all that is
here, on account of his continually being with God, and his
574 being" far from all visible practice, he rightly withdraws him-
self even from these things. Great is the labour of discrimi-
nation, to him that is spoken to by God. May He in His
mercy, give us to accomplish the work of Him that has said
:
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do
to you, do ye even so to them 1 To whom be glory and
).
honour from the whole creation for ever and ever. Amen.
LXXXII
HOW MUCH HONOUR HUMILITY POSSESSES
AND HOW HIGH ITS RANK IS
I clessire to open my month, my brethren, to speak on the
elevated place of humility ; but I am filled with fear, as a
man who is conscious of the fact, that he will speak concer-
ning God in a tale of his own speech. For humility is the
garment of divinity ; for the word which became man, put it
on and spoke in it with us, through our body. And every one
who puts it on in truth, by humility takes the likeness of
Him that has descended from His height and concealed the
splendour of His majesty and hidden His glory, lest the cre-
ation should perish by the sight of Him. For the creation was
not able to see Him without His being united to a part of it
which He should assume and speak with them through it-,
then the creation was able to hear the word of His mouth,
face to face.
The children of Israel were not able to listen to His voice,
while He spoke with them from within the cloud; then should
the creation be able to bear the sight of Him openly? For
the children of Israel were so troubled that they said to Moses:
Let us speak with thee, and listen thou to His words for us;
575 but let Him not speak with us, lest we die2 ). And so terrible
was the sight, that even the intermediary said : I fear and
tremble. For on mount Sinai the splendour of His glory revealed
itself, and the whole mountain smoked and was shaken from
1) Matthew 7, 12 2) Exodus 20,29

HOW MUCH HONOUR HUMIUTV POSSESSES KTC. j°0
fear of His revelation that took place on it, so that even the
beasts which approached the foot of the mountain, died. And
all the children of Israel, on the order of Moses, prepared
themselves, every one purifying himself for three days in order
to be worthy of listening to the sound of God's speech and
of seeing His revelation. And when the moment came, they
were not able to bear the sight of His light, and the vehe-
mence of the sound of His thunder.
But now that He has poured out His grace on the world
by His coming, not in ear — thquake nor in fire, nor with a ter-
rible and vehement sound but descending as the rain upon
the lamb's fleece, and a — s the soft dew drops which softly
descend upon the earth it has pleased Him to speak with
us in a different way, concealing His majesty in the cover of
flesh, speaking to us while being in us, in the garment which
Providence had woven from the womb of the virgin, so that
we, seeing Him speak with us as one of our race, should not
be terrified by the sight of Him. Therefore, every one who
puts on the garment in which our Creator appeared, by means
of a body full of holiness, puts on Christ. For with the likeness
in which He appeared to His creation and in which He dealt
576 with us, He desired to clad His inner man and in it He de-
sired to appear to His fellow men, and with it [He desired] to
be adorned in stead of with the garment of honour and out-
ward glory. And therefore the creatures prostrate themselves
as to a lord before every one whom they see being clad
with this likeness, silent or speaking, on account of the ho-
nour of their Lord with which they saw Him clad and in
which He wandered about.
Which of the creatures should not be intimidated by the
sight of the humble? Yet before the glory of humility revealed
itself to all, this sight full of holiness was despised by them.
But now that He has caused its majesty to dawn before the
eye of the worlds, every man honours this likeness, where-
soever it shows itself. For through the mediation of it, the
creation became worthy of receiving the sight of its Creator.
And therefore [humility] is not despised even by the enemies
of truth. And though he that has acquired it, should be a
beggar in comparison with all creatures, yet he that has learned
it, is honoured on account of it as if he were clad with crown
and purple. No one will ever hate the humble nor assail him
Vcrli. Afd. LctU-rk. 1922 (Wensinrk). 25

386 HOW MUCH HONOUR HUMILITY POSSESSES ETC.
with a word, nor despise him. And because his Lord loves
him, he is beloved by every one. Every one loves him, every
one cherishes him. And wherever he comes, he is looked
upon as an angel of light and distinguished by [signs of] honour.
When the sage and the learned speak, they are ordered to
be silent in order to give the humble an opportunity to speak.
The eyes of everyone look on his mouth [in order to know]
which word will come forth from it. Every one awaits his
577 words, as words from Gocl. The sense of his few words is
investigated as the words of a philosopher. Sweet are his
words to the ear of the sages, more than honeycomb is to
the palate of those who taste it. And by everyone he is
reckoned as a God, though he be simple in his words and
of mean aspect. He that speaks of the humble in a despising
way, is not reckoned as one living, but as one who opens his
month against God. And the more despicable he is in his
own eyes, the more honour is shown to him on the part of
the creatures.
The humble approaches the beasts of prey and as soon as
their eye rests on him, their wildness is tamed and they come
to him and accompany him as their master, wagging their tails
and licking his hands and his feet. For they smell from him
the smell which spread from Adam before his transgression,
when the beasts gathered near him and he gave them names,
—
in Paradise the smell which was taken from us and given
back to us anew by Christ through His advent, which made
the smell of the human race sweet.
And when the humble approaches the deadly reptiles, as
soon as the touch of his hands attains to their bodies, the
virulence of their deadly poison is cooled and with his hands
he crushes them as if they were locusts 1 ).
And when he approaches the children of man they look
upon him as upon their lord. Why do I mention the children
578 of man ? Because, notwithstanding all the evil and stubborn-
ness of the demons and all the pride of their own mind,
as soon as they meet the humble, they become as dust : all
their hardness becomes weak, their tricks become craftless, their
cunnings idle.
Now that we have shown in how great honour humility
1) With this passage is to be compared the Book of the Dove, p. So

HOW MUCH HONOUR HUMILITY POSSESSES KTC. 387
stands with God and how great a power is hidden in it, we
will clearly show what humility is, and when a man will be
deemed worthy of receiving it in its fulness, as it is. And we
shall make a distinction between him who is humble in some
respects and him that has been deemed worthy of veracious
humility.
Humility is a mysterious power, which the perfect saints
receive when they have reached accomplishment of behaviour.
And this power is not granted except to those who, by the
power of Grace, have personally accomplished the whole of
excellence, in so far as nature in its domain is able to
do this. For humility is all-comprehending excellence. And
therefore we cannot deem every man humble, without dis-
crimination, but only those who have been deemed worthy
of the rank mentioned. Not every one who in his nature is
peaceful or quiet or discrete or without blame, has reached
the rank of humility.
But a humble one in truth is he that, possessing inwardly
something worthy of being proud of, does not extol himself,
but is as dust in his own thoughts. Nor do we call humble
him that humbles himself on account of the recollection of
his low characteristics or trespasses, which he remembers in
order that his heart may become contrite and his mind with-
579 drawn from impulses of haughtiness, however praiseworthy this
may be. For. he still possesses deliberations of haughtiness.
Humility however he does not possess, but, by various means,
he seeks to draw it towards himself. And however praise-
worthy this may be, as I have said, he does not yet possess
humility ; he asks for it, but it is not his.
A
perfectly humble one is he that does not need to find
out a cause which should make his mind humble. But he
has fulfilled all these, and possesses humility as something
natural, without bestowing any labour upon it•, so that, even
though he has received wi — thin him the great gift of whi — ch all
creatures are not worthy namely his [humble] nature yet
he is deemed a sinner and a simple man in his own eyes.
And though he has penetrated into the mysteries of all spiri-
tual kinds [of beings], and possesses great wisdom concerning
all the creatures, he knows with perfect certainty that he knows
nothing- . And this he is not by any intermediary ; but without
compulsion he is so in his heart.

388 HOW MUCH HONOUR HUMILITY POSSESSES ETC.
Can it be possible that man should be so, that nature can
thus change him ? No. But do not doubt for this reason.
For this mysterious strength which he has received, which
makes him perfect in all excellence, without labour, is the
strength which the blessed Apostles received under the aspect
of fire. And on account of it our Saviour ordered them that
they should not leave Jerusalem before having received the
strength from on high, namely the Comforter which is the Spirit.
And this is the spirit of visions. And this is what is said
concerning them in the Scripture: To the humble the mysteries
are revealed l This means that the humble are deemed worthy
).
58° of receiving within them this spirit of revelations which explains
the mysteries. And therefore it has been said by holy men,
that humbleness makes the soul perfect by divine revelations.
Therefore, no one should venture to think concerning him-
self that he has personally reached the rank of humility, on
account of a single thought of contrition which has once risen
[in his heart], or on account of a few tears which he has shed,
or on account of one beautiful attribute which he possesses by
nature or which he has acquired by compulsion for he would
;
in that case have acquired that which is the summit of all
mysteries and the sum of all excellence in the domain of small
labours and reckon these as the whole gift. But if a man has
vanquished all contrary spirits, and if none of all the works of
excellence fails him, for which he has not laboured in order
to possess them, and if he has vanquished and subdued all
forteresses of resistance, and if he then perceives with his spirit
that his soul has received the gift, while the Spirit witnesses
to his spiritaccording to the word of the Apostle, then this is
the summit of humility. Blessed is he that has acquired it, for
he at all times embraces Jesus' bosom.
But if a man asks: What shall I do? How can I acquire
it? By what means shall I become worthy of receiving it? For,
if I compel myself and think that I have acquired it, I see
that unperceivecl contrary impulses err through my mind, and,
consequently, I fall into despair.
581 He that asks this, is to be answered thus: It is expedient
for the disciple to be as his master, and for the slave as his
lord. Look at Him who has commanded this and who grants
1) Cf. IV 25,9

HOW MUCH HONOUR IIUMTLITV POSSESSES ETC. 389
the gift, how IIe acquired it; and strive thou to become like
Him ; then thou canst do it. For He has said : The prince of
this world cometh, and hath nothing in me1 ). Doest thou see
how humility is to be acquired by the accomplishment of
all excellence? So that we have to imitate Him that has com-
manded it. ,The foxes have holes and the birds of the air have
nests, but the son of man hath not where to lay his head'2 ).
To whom be glory from all those who have become perfect
and have been sanctified and become accomplished, in all ge-
nerations, with the Father who sent Him and the Holy Ghost,
now and always and for ever and ever. Amen.
1) John 14,30 2) Matt. 8,20

—— ——
GENERAL REGISTER
[The Roman figures refer to the pages of the Introduction, the Arabic ones to those
of Bedjan's text as printed on the margin of the translation].
—
Aberration XXXII, 3. 5, 6, 71, 192, 193, on us 197; classes of angels 1 — 99 sq.;
307, 375, 494, 495, 503, 5°5- do not reach perfection 225; liable to
Accidents (rS^cJi^JX — XXIII,175sqq., aberration 505.
496, 503; no fortuitous 176. Angelic service 152 sq.
Accomplished (The — ), 219. See Perfect. Antoniu3 185, 260, 311 sq., 421 sq.,
Affectahle state; — as opposed to the 5io, 563.
spiritual one 122; of the mind (heart) Apartment 216, 340, 512, 548.
401, 446; affectable part of the soul 474. Apathy X — LVI1I, 243; thewin — gsof — 367;
Affections XXI — X sqq., XLIX, cease only psychic 4—78; temp — orary 494, 511 j
in the desertI;
•
andworld 18;whatthey definition of 51—3; onlytobereached
arc iS sq., 432, 47 — 2; their relation to t—he by solitude 520; ofthemartyrs536:
soul 21, 25 sq.; of the body 25; regarding the affections 543.
of body and soul 25, 397,—484, 521; Apellcs (Apollos?) 554.—
bodily, psychic and mixed 484; can- Apper — ception. Second of the senses
not wholly be vanq — uished 28; their four 4; in three ways 195.
roots 28; mental 42; easier to be Approach untoGod 104,107,329,464,566.
avoided than to be vanqu—ished 90; their Arsenius 154, 30S — 312, 451 bis, 561
dangerous power 122; bereave the 563, 568.
solita—ry of con — solation 124; torments of Asceticism L.
the • 203; a fence against virtu—es Asking great things from the king 32 sqq.
217; martyrs — and apostles exempt from Athanasius 185. His „Mirror of solita-
220, 432; expelled — by solitude 244, ries" 560.
254, by weeping 253; cor—roborated by Basilius 23, 243, 290, 353.
luxury 2S5 ; the —veil of the sometimes Beasts of the field arc submissive to the
w
3 to
i
3
t
2;
h
b —
d
e p
r
r
a
p o
w
u v
n
r i i d f
3
e i
0
e d —d
5;
by aw t a h y e
bo
4 d
r
4 e
n
4 mo ;
f
n
r
t s
o
he
m
38 a
d
s 2
i
s
s
a
t
s u
r
q l
a
. t
c
s ;
ti—o
o
n
f Be r 8 a i 2 u g ; h t t y — e . ous I o , f nw 3 a t S r h 7 e d . — soli a t n a d ty me 1 r 1 c 9 y ; 8; the men — tal th — at
4
th
8
e
r; th
4
e
81
d
;
ying
c — omp
4
a
8
r
4
e
:
d w—ith
of
dog
l
s
ove
214
o
,
f Bo
c
d
r
y
ea
.
tes
To
all
le
b
a
e
v
a
e
uti
t
e
he
s —187.
behind 5; its evil
4 gl 8 o 8 r ; y t a —h n e d — mon o e f — y un 4 b 8 e 5 lie ; f th 4 e 88 cl : ou t d h s e o g f a t r h m e e - —nt d t e h l i i n b g e s rat 8 i ; on—s 5 a ; c i o ts mra lo d n e gi o n f g si a n fte 2 r 67 v ; isi h b a l s e
A A A A l f l g o t p l e r a l u f e e r x e t s t g i h a h m h f o e i n o r w e d ( d i o n M e v c a e a a 5 r r 5 n 2 w l ) 1 0 a 0 t ; y , f h 6 i e r 3 n , o t 5 b e 6 m G y r 9 4 r c p . 3 e a t r 7 a u t h e . s t r e t e o a d u t 4 —b i 0 b l o 5 y e n . s 5 s 5 X e 0 l 5 X . f 4 l I 0 o V v ; e s 5 c q 3 o q a 9 . t ; of B Br o s t s t n e n o h c h e a e d d s o d u d s u s . i c l b e t d o o o i f d T r n i y h h f j 2 e e o G 6 i y i t o s 0 o h ; d s p 4 e w h p 5 a — e a o 4 v 7 a l , s ; e l k e n a , d 4 l b c v 0 , y u a a . t r n n h t e q e d — a l u i o s i s n e n o s e 3 u h o i d 1 l t f 6 s i . i w t i n s i n h l e t s l h 2 t e — 6 r b d o 7 e r n ; c g u 5 o n 5 w m 2 8 k h . e 6 e e S n n ; - a
Allurements (spiritual) 216, 218bis.
Amm n 185, 421 sq. Care (divine) surround—s men always 64.
Angels helping martyrs andsolitaries 66 Cell. Staying in the under a—ll circum-
68; their nature 182 sqq.—; do not reach stances 130, 177, 340, 342: is the
Cod's wisdom 186, 196; cannot teach cavern —ofMoses' revelation 178; treasures
us true contemplation 197; their influence of the 216.

.
392 GENERAL REGISTER
C
Ch
l
i
o
l
u
d
d
re
1
n
93,
gu
2
a
1
r
7
d
:
ed—by
wh
G
i
o
c
d
h
5
c
2
o
5
v
.
ers the ta- j
3
ta
3
t
3
ion
S
s
T,
41
3
3
3
;
9,— 341
43
s
S
q
,
.;
4
t
4
h
8
e
,
—
45
o
6
f
,
te
4
m
8
p
1
-
,
Co b m er m n a ac n l d e m 4 e S0 n . ts. Spiritual — take the 1 De 4 a 98 d , t 5 o 37 t - he world 19, 31, 51, 59, 75, 76,
place of written law 91. 97, "I, 147, 148, 251, 310, 332, 346,
Com 111ent.itor (Theodore of Mopsuestia) j 435, 444, 501, 544; to be dead in life
XVII, 113 sq., 155 sqq., 160, 168,319,
j
31, 333, 335; t0 die —in integrity 31, 97,
C C C o o o 3 m m m 5 m p m 2 e a > u s r n 3 s c 5 i » i e , o o . n n 4' T 8 w . h t i e o th t b i e G m o e p d u o s f 8 h , e — d 534 1 b . 7 a 7 c . k by the j ! — m 2 w o 6 h r 8 e t / t i n 9 o f , ic t t a h 2 h t e e 9 i ° o s , w n o — o u r r t l l e n d c g i a s r b -s — d y o i u n ' v g 2 e 1 r a 0 a l c ; l i ° t o y— h u i s a n f i g p f n s e r c a s 1 t y i 1 i e n 2 o r s n , s 4 2 5 7 5 4 0 5 2 6 7 ; ; ; ;
Co s n ol c i e ta n r t y r 1 a 5 t 3. io Se n e X s X . X v. — VI Mer sq c . y. ; — andexcel- | ; t 5 o 52; bec — ome to all i t n hi l n if g e s f 3 o 9 r 7, the 57 s 2. akeofGod
lence —I sq., 19, 44; and —contemplation Death o — f the body is strength of the so—ul
45; - and recitati — on 92; and pray — er 268; 271; i — nner deadncss 331;
129, 171 sq., 446; • ofthesenses 131; — 332, 333, 23—5; o — f the outward limbs
136, 142, 14G, 219,243,33—2,336,44—7; 444; fear of — 10; desired as life 10;
promoted by fasting 452; —466 ; the recolle — ction of 44, 453, 458, 460, 462,
desire of the solitary $15; 516, 547, 464; do
—
es not ex—ist with God 189;
C C o o 5 n n 5 s f 5, o i l d 5 a e 6 t o n . i c o e n (t 1 r S us 1 t) 99 sqq., 192 sq., 241, l i 2 n o 7 t v 0 e e l ; r li — gi 2 l 1 i c l 9 o e ; gna v t o e l 2 u t 0 n o t 9 a ; s r l y eep — in a es g s r o e f o e f a t b m h l i e e nd t s o e 2 n 8 s t —9 e h ; s e
2—91, 366 i 377, 379, 395, 40S, 529 sqq.; no one to be —called a victor before
Conte an m d pl fe a ar ti 3 o 62 n . XXXIX, com — pared with 4 of 07 G ; o — r d isk 4 i 3 n 6 g ; — fur the the sea s l ake on of ou th r e b l o o o v k e
excellence 17; defi—nition of 17—; first •436; desirable 482; better is death in
anil second natural 31: angelic 3—1; struggle than life with falling 215,—538.
also called—the naked mind 31; divine — Degrees. The way consists inthree 122,
31, 198; — and concentration 45; the degrees of the path 303.
53, 126; is psychic sight —128, 162; Dejectcdness 113, 180, 181, 213, 258,
heavenly contemplations 134; duri — ng 259, 277, 284, 291, 299, 302, 340, 38—5,
prayer—135, ^4; pray — er different from — 455, 466, 468, 4S5, 506, 535sq., 58°;
166; and spi—ritual 16S; profound — the beginning of darkness 14 sq.; effec-
1S2; essent—ial 187, 198; veracious tuated by distraction 217, 383; by lone-
194;—true is essenti—al sight 195; light liness 455, 466; n — othing is so strong as
of —200; s—piritual —217, 303, 570; despair 532; how vanishes 555-
true • 222; 223; which is inter- Dclight may rise suddenly during—prayer
—preted spiritual sight—260,544; immateri — al 58; does not appear at will 163; pre-
3°—3j personal 304; — heavenly ceded by the pains of the cross 216.
3—07; and solitude 339; 444; tr—ue Demons. Their nature 1S2 sqq., 196.
the mortification — of the h — eart 444; Desert I.
and prayer 475; 492; in ecstasy Despair see Dejectedness.
513; intelligible — -— 521; the — kingdom of Despondency see Dejectedness.
heaven is spiritual 528; of —all the Deviation see Aberration. —
worlds —544; practice anterior to 571^ Diodorus Rhetor XVII, 186, 242; of
divine 571. — Tarsus 2S5.
Creation. The second 81. — Dionysius the Arcopagite LIII, 169. —
Cross. Us double nature 15 sq—.; • 22—3, Discernment(distinction)41sq.,89,134
232; excellence is called the 532; 136, 146, 1S9, 217, 238 sq., 281, 379,
Cr i u s c t i h f e ix ga i t o e n of of m t y h s e te m r i i n e d s 2 5 2 4 3 4 , . 232,233; — 4 5 3 6 2 °, s 5 q. 7 , 3- 442 sq., 465 sq., 479, 546, 555,
of the bo — dy 23S; we have always to take Disdain has to be sought LIV sq.,—76, 85
Cu u s p t o o n ms us . Las 5 c 3 i 5 v . ious — —4; cutti — ng off — b sq e , s 3 o 5 u 6 g . ht On by th a e ss q u u m es m t i i n o g n a wh s e i t n h f e ul r appe m a a r y -
234; recollection of 297; to be ance 142 sq.
feared — - 527. Disparity 192 sip, 207. Sec Equality.
Distraction XXXVI 1, 3, 53. 60,72,82,
Darkness of mind 14, 124, 144,284,329, 122, 131, 135, 172, 213, 216, 271 sq.,

GENERAL REGISTER 393
—
282, 332, 466, 481,4—85,514,517,54r; and martyrs 241 s—q.; effectuates strength
and intercou — rse 52; an opportunity for in the sjuI 26S; — on the — way to light
Satan —130; effectuatesdejcct—edness2 17, 281; solitude and 282; helpful for
383; and good works 308; damages concentration 452.
D D o r c g u h m a n s a k t t i e t i y n c n s 4 e 4 . s 5; s Is h a X a o L c w I 's II it a , ve v L r a I n s , i i s o 2 h n , es t 5 o 9, 5—55 1 . 74 X , X 2 V 0 I 2 . , F F e a 4 t a ; e r bo o ( d f i r l G ^ y o J d L an . I d I^ s p q ) s q. y , c 1 h 7 i 3 5 c 15 ; — s s e q e . 20 ; A ; — cc — i a d n en d p t ri s d o . o r ub t t o
2
5
2
4
0
3?
, 2
5
5
S
4
5
,
;
3
n
3
e
4
v
,
er
358
c
,
eas
3
i
7
n
7
g
, 4—54,
77
5
;
°4,
dr
5
u
"
n
,
k
l
cf
o
.
ve
31
3
5
0
;
; b
h
r
o
i
p
n
e
gs
an
t
d
he
fe
s
a
o
r
ul
91
ne
;
ar—to
a
G
nd
od
tr
8
u—
1
s
,
t
with living wine —555. 194, 362; when fear is expelled 194;
Dunghill. Man's 32. and love 317, 430; no fear of outward
things in the true solitary 539.
Ecstasy 5bis, 20, 43, 73, 106, 125, 139, Fervour 19, 94, 95, 122, 127 sq., 129,
4
1
8
55
9
,
, 5
'7
'
5
3
,
,
2
5
5
J
9
6
,
,
3
5
0
4
5
9
,
;
36—0,
w
3
h
91
e
,
n
4
t
5
h
1
e
, 4
t
7
w
1
o
,
- 4
I
8
J
4
I,
, 4
1
S
3
6
6
,
,
5
1
1
7
2
2
,
,
5
2
'
4
9
1
,
,
5
2
5
S
0
2
,
,
5
3
5
3
5
2
;
, —375,
cal
3
,
9
s
2
c
,
s
fold senses are closed 9; ecstatic under- a brother to beat the earth with his head
standing when the heart is free from ahundredtimes140; — causedbythinking
recollections 52; man bec — omes as a— corpse of God 261.
without a soul through — 164; and File 190, 328. —
p t—
— —
e
t
o c r
h
s a
r
t
e
y c a i
e
e
d
l n o r
u
i m c
r d
G e
i a
1 o
n y
6 t
g
d
s
6 h 1 , o 7 3
s
u
3
0 0
l
g
S
; 1 4
e
h
8
7
e
, t
;
4
p
—, 3 — 7 o
4
f 6 2 d
9
; 6 u
2 d
1 G r
; u
— i o ;
r
n d
i
g
c n
a
o g
3 n
n
f 7 d
t
o i
o
7
e
u n
n
;
m
r s
e
i
p
l
l
t d —e h
d a
a n e
t a
y c
i y
s e d
o
w u
n
2 3 o
1
r 6 6 r
8
i 0 l 1
9
n
i
; d
;
; g
n
Fo —o
o
t 2 r n h
n
5 g a e 1
e
t ' , e
t
s t
h s
i
e e
o s c
l
f w ( .
f b
t h n o
o
e )
3 d
r 1 n
9 y
e 7 a
5
t 4 t h ; u
a ;
e 1 r
n —
7 e
— d
w 0 1 o ; 7 2 r
t
9 5 l
h
,
t
4 — d
e h
;
e
2
w
5 — , 5
o
a
w
5
r
l ,
o
l 3
l
9
r
b
d
9 o
l
w 3 , d o
d 3
2 i r
2
5 l 5 l
7 a
, y d 2
, n
l 6
d
l y ; 3
3
i 6 f
3
e
l
9 t
8 i
h ;
f ;
3 i
e
2 n a — —7 g
o
l ; s l
f
E E E E m n q p o u l h t a i r i l g 5 a o i ' h i 3 n t t - m s y e . n S a e y S n r d e d u c s m n I e 4 o 3 m n n 7 p . u - 6; l e s q — e ua s l . i i nt t e y llec 1 t 92 8 , . 207, F F r r t " 1 e e h 7 5 e 5 1 e e , , d d fl o o [ e 2 9 s m 9 m h i 1 , , o 5 X f 1 1 X 3 9 8 s 3 X 5 ; p 0 , I e , I e 2 ; c 0 3 h 7 3 t , X 5 ( h , L f e 3 r I 2 a b 4 X 3 n 2 o . k ; 7 d n , e y 3 s , s 4 5 ) 2 5 2 9 , 0 7 , 3 . 6, , 5 7 1 2 5 3 8 , , - 1 J S 7 ' e 0 4 , e ,
213.
Familiarity.
Error see Aberration. Friend (God, the) 219.
Essence (=God) 187, 194,198,199,200,
—
Eu
3
a
7
g
6,
ii
3
u
7
s
8,
4
4
,
55
1
,
06,
47o
1
.
74, '75, 3§5, 443,45$,
G
Gl
a
a
r
d
m
n
e
e
n
s
t
s
.
.
La
E
s
x
t
ulting —
of
j
t
o
h
y
e
5
m
8
i
;
nd —31.
without
Ex 4 c 6 e 2, ll 4 e 9 n 5, ce 497 and sq., con 5 — c 1 e 3 n , tr 5 a 7 t 3 i . on 1 sq.; — a c l a l use oth 1 e 7 r 7, sen 4 s 7 a 1 t ; ions 4 i 3 n 1; G — od a t s ak a es m a e w a a n y s
and — the world 2; and contemplation to recognize th—e degree — ofone's own soul
p 1 r 7 i ; or to t — h s e pir n i a t t u u a r l al kn h o e w a l lt e h dg o e ft 3 h 0 e ; s w o h u a l t 24 — ; 4 ca 8 n 3; ex s p p r i e ri s t s ua 4 l 86; 4 — 84; somet w i h m i e c s h c n a o us t e o s ng t u h e e
is 423; is called the cross 532. solitary to give up — recitation of Psalms
Face of God can be seen but not essen- Gl 5 o 5 r 0 y ; . un V s a p i e n aka — ble and 5 fo 5 r 5 n - ication 45; the
—
tially 324. harm of 328.
Faith has to be — combined with works 102—; Gold. Images of — andpreciousthings27—8.
the value o—f 315; the degrees of Grace. Its sudden workings 177 i what
318 sqq.; and knowledge 318, 360 imparts to us 198.
—S(11-, 379; the gate of th—e myster—ies 315; Grave, the time of — gathering fruits 435.
ofsight 320 ; taste of 36 — 6 ; makes Guardian, Man's 175 sq.
man like God 362; when swallows
—
knowledge 374; definitionsof 376, 482. ITandiwo rk. See Work. —
Familiarity with God 265. Healing of the soul 16; of the inner
Familiarity of speech 36, 41, 73, 75, man 483. —
114, 33o, 335, 353, 421, 427, 528. See Health of the soul 24, 89, 433, 484; —
Freedom. — effectuated by sickness of the bo — dy 69;
P'asting 238 sqq. Without — no know- gives birth to knowledge 431; injured
ledge of God's mysteries —48; the sign by intercourse 435.
of beginning strife 238; of the ascetics Hearing and sight 54, 320.

—
;;
394 GENERAL REGISTER
—
Heart the central organ of the inward prayer 44—0; ferve—nt of the soul 447
senses 29. — — troubled 448; unto t — he entrance in
Hell. Definition of 88; — doesnotexi — st the spiritual wor — ld 454; of the will
with God 189; intelligible 456,521; 475; right haDd— 480;uncorpor — eal486
is ignorance and oblivion of God 523. hot and quick 516; scar—ce which
Hidden things 51, 127 sq., 149, 181, 282, are not swift 517; perverted 527;—hid-
3*9, 338, 373-, 396, 410, 438, 529, 53°; den emotions 538; —vibrating, hot of
H
Ho
o
h n
p
id o
e
d u en r
an
s
d
t t o at
f
b e
e
s e
ar
5 r 1 e
9
9 j
1
. e
;
cte—d 7
9
6
6
,
;
1
a
2
l
0
l
.—
has to
In
o
t i
f
h t e i
fa
a S
i
t e
th
r e a d p
3
h
6
s (
1
t ;
;
he s )— im 1 p
s
6 l
o
2 e
u
,
l
1
4
8
7
7
0
5 , 7
;
1. 2—50;
kno
—
wle
e
d
y
g
e
e
s
—
be given up by him that begins with the 4S3; Euagrius is called one ofthe 573.
works of God 97. — Inspiration 160, —390 sqq.
Hous — emates. God's 33, 36. God as Intelligent. The 479.
a 62. Intelligible rays between the words ot
Humble 76, 85 sq., 93, 10—5, 279, 351. the scriptures 6; — — forces of the soul 91,
Mysteries revealed to the — 122; cha- o — f the mind 161 — ; appercepti — ons 174;
racteristics of the 5'5 scl'b> 's bashful death 209—; force 37 — 0; resur-
before his own soul 517; the prayer of rection 374; light—376; hell 456;
t b h e e for h e um t b he le —51 5 7 76 s ; q. e ; st t e h e e me c — d re a a s tu a res Go t d im b i y d — d—isti s n i c g t h i t on 47 b 2 e ; twe — en air 4—7 t 2 h ; ing — s 4 s 7 u 2 n , 4 47 9 3 4 ; ;
everyone 527; the perfect 579- contemplation 521; — places 522.
Humility XXXVIII, 34, 76, 93, 105, 108 Intention. The heart's 292.
s<l-i T39, 220 sq., 224, 302, 32—1, 414, Intercourse (or Association)— XXXIV sq.,
421, 432, 507, 5—24. Works and make 52, 130, 131 bis,—133, 247; injures the
man a God 9—5; a—cause ofgrace 322; soul 89, 3—14; compared to a blist of
two kinds of 3—46 ; remunerated,not c — old 132; the cause of darkn—ess 329;
service 408 sq.; to—be asked from God with God and men 333; injures
with tears 412 sq—.; the beginning of health 435; lonely 566, 572.
repent
—
ance 444; expiates many si—ns Intoxication. See Drunkenness.
499; - compared to salt 499; how — John of Thcbais 152; the blessed John
Hu
i
t
5 5
5 m
s
r 7
7 1
u o 4
4 4
e
a
u ;
; c
r
q
—
s — u
s
—q i q
.
r .
5
e a ;
7
d
m
n
T 8 a
d
h ;
5 —
k e
0
e
m
t
8
s
e
h f
;
e
r
o
t c
u
h
a
t
r s
e y h
u
e
— m
5
m
g
m
2 c
a
a
i
8 h
n
r
5
a
t
;
S
m ra
0
e h
o
c
. C
n
f
i t
h
t g e
r —
r h
i
i
s
s o r t
t
f a i
5 H
n c
8 k
k s d
0 e
i
.
v o o i
5
f f n
7
i —
4
t
;
y
i i
J
J K
o
u i
y 3
s 3 n
. 3
4 t
4
8 g i
-
.
S
d c
e
e o
e
m a
G
. s
la
c T
d
o
n
h m
e
e p
s
a
s
p
.
r u e r d e w — ith 2 c 2 o 1 m . passion 344,
1
Ig 8 n 7 o ; ra — nc d e u . rin W g he p t r h a e ye r r — 17 w 5 i ; ll— be an an d ni o h b i l l i a vi t o e n d ' K K K n n n e o o e w w l l i i e n n d g g g s o e n 5 e 7 X se L l s I f q. i , s s q k . 9 n 8, S o p w i 1 i r 6 i n 2 t g , ua a l l 3 l 4 — 1 t , h
—
i p n 4 o g 8 s s 8 te . 2 r 2 i— 4 o . r
of God 522. — — ! to excellence 30; second natural 3—1;
Illness 347; of thoughts 16; of the without excellence impos—sible 42; of
Il s l o u ul mi 2 n 4, at 4 e 6, d 34 (t 4 h , e) 401 15 ; 8, sic 1 k 62 i , n m 2 i 26 n , d 4 2 0 7 0 S . , j | m li y f s e te 4 r 2 i ; es fi o rs f t s cr u e m a m t i e t d o t f hings is 48 t ; hat e—ss o e f nt t i h al e
Il 3 3 l 2 2 u 4 6 m , , i 3 n 3 4 3 a 0 0 - t , io 33 n 7, XX 38 X 9 V , I 4 I 4 I 6 , , 6, 44 1 8 2 , 5, 4 1 5 6 5 4 , , 4 1 8 9 5 6 , , I ) ! j s c 6 h q 0 i , q l . d ; 18 o t 7 f h ; e —tr o w u n a e y t — h o e f 2 s t 0 r p 1 u e e e ; ch — Su - o n f d — 1 a 8 t y 0 r ; ue a lo s v y e mb 1 t o 7 h 5 l e
Im 4 a 9i g , e 55 o 5 f , G 5 o 62 d , 5 is 67- the soul XLVIII, 21, I o 3 f 1S tr s u q e q.. • 3—3 2 7 0 , 2; 52 s 2 p , iri 5 tu 2 a 6 l ; — , 2 l 1 o— 7 v , e 2 a 2 n 1 d ,
126, 169. — I sight 222; and —humility 224; with
Impulses — XXXI. Inward 4;—intellectual ' dis—cernment 281; ofGod —307; degrees
— 31; in— God 46; divine 59, 25—9; '> of 318 —sqq., 360 sqq.; anterior to
i d 8 i l 7 s , l t u i m n 1 i c 6 n t 6 a i , t v e e d 3 — 76 - ; 23 4—8 0 , ; e 2 o c f 2 s 6 t , a t t h i e 2 c 81 s — o ; ul 2 s 5 pi 4 1 r 6 ; i 6 — t , u h a o l 2 t 60; ! | j f — 3 a 6 i . 9 th ; 366 a w , n h d e 4 n 30 — —, po 4 i s 3 s t 7 e s , r w i a o 4 l r 7 l 4 o t , w o ed 5 it 2 b 8 3 y ; 18 f s ; a i i m t p p h s l y e 3 c 7 h— 4 i ; c
of the body 285; dark a — nd cold 293, ! impulses of 377—sqq.; natural, spiritual
341: c — ontemplative 303; ofknowledge ' and super — natural 37—7 sq.; clear flame
377j — of love and b—eautiful things 392; —of holy 395; true 43—0, 470, 494;
clear 399, 438; interwoven with ' gives birth to love 431; born from

GENERAL REGISTER 595
—
health of the so—ul 431; a definition — of Mercy 8 sq., 42 sq., 54, 455 sq., 492,
431; spiritual and love 475; in- 506, 507. See also s. v. Compassion.
comparable 4—47; partial accomplishment Mcsalleyane 495-
4 in 73; spi i r n i i t t u i a a l ted —rea 2— c 8 h 3 e ; d s b p y irit a ual few — on n l o y t Mi t n o d he ( a r rt dU 2 i 9 . ; 't n , ake K d 1SC — \Cd 3 ) 1 . bis I , ts 3 r 0 e 3 l ; ati — on
reach—ed by psychic 526; snares ofpsy- naturally tends towards good 197. —
chic 528. Mirror XXXVII. Our own state — a of
Li t g h h o t u . gh — t I s nw 1 a 7 r ; d e
—
ssent s i p a r l in — gs 4 f 9 r ; om — m p i u n r d ity cla o d f I j Mo
g
t r o
o
t
d
i s
l
e f
y
c i
t
c G
h
a
i
o t
n
d
g
i
s
o i n
4
n
55
a se
;
e
—t
s
h
.
e
5 v ^ .
p
4
u
- D
r
e
e
ad
so
.
ul a $20;
with— 52; the flower of the— of truth Motions. See s.v. Impulses.
52; of knowledge —187; of con- I Mountains beyond the Ocean 188.
t i 4— — n 3 e t 4 m e , p l o i l f a i 5 g t 5 l i i i 7 b f o l ; e n e 4 — — 5 2 6 0 ; 0 o , f 3 — — 7 t 6 5 h ; e 5 a 0 n m ;— d ind s o i f g 4 h 4 o t t f 7 h , 4 e 7 f 4 a 2 s 8 i o 5 t 2 u h , l di 3 5 3 v 6 6 7 i 0 0 n 9 ; ; e , | j j M M o y 6 s u 8 t r ; e n — r i i n e g o s f . G o I o f t d s ' vi s v s a i g l b r u l e e e at t 5 n h — 2 e i 3 s n . s gs 72 48 ; ; Go h d i ' d s d — en 8 — 3.
L L i o k v e e n
4
e
7
X s
4
L s
;
I . I —
hi
D s
d
i q
d
. v ,
e
i
n
n m e or
—
e
5
i
3
1 n
0
6 t
.
9 i , ma 5 te 07, th—a 5 n 10. service | j j N
N
a
a
3 t 2
k
u 6
e
r ;
d
e
.— T
is
h
m
e
t i h
m
n e
o
d
n
fi
k
3 rs 1 t
g
,
o
b
e
3
s
o 0 o 3 k . g
t
i
h
v
r
e
o
n
ug
t
h
o
t
m
he
an
wor
6
l
1
d
.
55 sq.; even in Hell 201 ; a child I Natural, praeternatural and supernatural
o — f true knowledge 201,—431; drunk with ' 375-
2 — 02; the ways of— 205 s—q.; spiri- I Negligence in small things 289.
tual 217; di—vine 218; is h — ot Nitria 185.
by nature 219; and mad — ness 219; , ,
knowledge — and sight 222; of God and Ocean surrounds the borders ofheavenand
tears 245; - ofGod the accomplishme — nt earth 18S.
ofall spiritual fruits 2—61; the b — read of —
316 sq.; meaning of 317; and fear Path. The mystic has three degrees
—317; the flame of the love of God 337; XXLY, 121.
caused by God is a fountain f — rom the Perfect (the), 250, 27—1, 495, 569, 578;
depth — 382; to be consumed by 430; perfect man 531; the need not mingle
divine—the flower ofspiritual knowl — edge with works of mercy 573.
475; the fruit of—prayer 475; of Perfection XXXVIII, 108, 122,251,280,
God is self—denial 476; ofmankind507, 478, 491, 507 sq., 560.
508, 510; ofGod and ofmankind570. Philo XLVI sqq.
Lucidity 131, 134. Philosophers 21, 401, 403 sqq.
Plotinus XL1X sqq.
Macarius 495, 500. Practice. Pr—actical things of a composite
Madness 131, 219 sq., 254. nature 7; and theory 15—; practical
Maggenanutha 390 sqq. things confuse the soul 81 ; anterior
Man's nature 197. to contemplation 571.
M M a a r r t c y u r s s t 2 h 2 e 0; so s l p i i t r a i r t y ua 5 l 32—. 31; unsee — nmar- P P r r a a i y s e e r i X s X t X o I b X e a sq v . oi ; d — ed wh 78 i . ch it is — not al-
tyrdo — m 209, 242; fasting of the 241 l — owed to describe 129. Purifying 52 >
sq.; are tho—se who suffer for their —act off by deli — ght 53; the significance
neighbour 348—; and renunciatio — n 436; of 105 sq.; —that gives place to
who the real is 456; the living 457. i thanksgivings 106; drives away the
Ma — tter XXVIII, a screen 2; solution from j —cloud of the affections 124; myste — ries of
7, 40. 151; what happens during - unto
Me f a ai n th s 36 L 0 V; sqq b . elong to knowledge, not to j j ; t— t i h n o c s t e ion w s ho in l—ive 1 i 6 n 3 so s l q. it ; ud t e he 16 l 2 imi s t q. w ; hi di c s h -
Meditation 72, 77, 98, —376, 486, 493; 1 is not allow — ed to surpass 163 sq.;
its value and —effect 73 — ; and ecstasy 1 delight— during different from sig—ht
73; nocturnal 138; and the — second j during — '64; contemplation during
s t t h a e ge li o g f ht kn o o f wl t e he dge sou 3 l 72; 379 co ; nst — ant — and a t n h d e j i p 1 u 6 r 4 e ; — v t a h n e ish l e i s mit by of co — n — tem 1 p 7 l 5 a ; tio — n 1 a 6 n 4 d ;
c
o
o
ri
n
g
t
i
e
n
mpl
o
a
f
tiv
te
e
ar—s 3
4
8
9
5
2
;
.
spiritual 461;
| '
e
c
c
o
s
n
t
t
a
e
s
m
y
pl
1
a
6
t
6
i
,
on
17
1
4
6
,
6;
261
a
;
few
dif
a
f
r
e
e
ren
d
t
ee
f
m
r
e
o
d
m

96 GENERAL REGISTER
;
— — —
woithy ofpure 167; pure XL, 16—7, prepares ecstasy 43; has to take place
16S, 175, 379, 453, 5'9; spiritual in complete rest 4S ; effectuates the illu-
XLI; cannot bo prayed 168, 170; con — tem- mination of the min — d 53; effectuates subt-
plation anil spiritual prayer 168 ; a lety of mind 68 —: is a fortification of
s m p e i d r i i a tu t a— o l r s b ta e t t e we 1 e 6 n 9; th w e hen psy—chic cea a se n s d 17 th 0 e , h th o e w m t i o n g d ain 13 d 5 e ; light f u r s o e m d - — by 38— G 2 r ; ac — e w 1 h 6 e 3 n ;
175; is the— time for receiving gif—ts the mind is distract—ed 446; a source
173; spiritual 175, 260,—519; no of pure prayer 446; of I'sahns the root
without tea—rs 253; constant 259, 304, of discipline 447.
544, 557; tnc starting poi — nt for inn — er Recollecti — on 8bis, 20 sq., 52 sq., 78,
Sight 260; contemplative — 326; 92, 182; of — the body 27; cannot be
the key to insight 329—; open under shaken — off 28; of the oilier world 5—3,
all circumstances —342; more excellent 306;— of evil things 59; prof—itable
—than alms 385; requires training 439; 91; of the affections 122; — of the
with a view to the love of God 439; dealings of non-freedom 244; of this
—true —- 44—0; recitation a source of pure w — orld in t—he world to come 257; external
447; during the night is high—er 258; —of God 258, 260 sq., 493,
than any work on the day 447;— hidden 512, 5—47; of things of this world
4 de 6 f 9 i , nit 4 i 7 on 0; of lo — ve 47 t 5 h , e 5 f 0 r 8 ui ; t t—r o u f e — is 47 d 5 y ; ing a t 2 e 6 r 0 a ; ted —of 28 t 3 ra ; nsi — tory of t c h u in s g t s oms 28 2 2 9 ; 7—; obl—i-
—to the world 475; lonely— 475; when of visible t—hings vanishes by (he of
is cut olT 490; no in th—e world God 375; of worldly things effac—ed
to com — e 503; revelatio — ns during 55^; in the third degree of knowledge 373;
—night higher than on the day 558; to be admitted withdiscernment38—1,396;
during vigils feared by Satan above getting void of the trouble —of 468—;
all things 559. affections which are ill — by 484;
Prostrations 129. without affections 484; of sensible
Prototype —455. — things 487; the r—ecollections which are
Pure. T — he 8, 522; the —in heart 50, lost sight of 514; of the world 545.
564: mind 92, 259; heart 118; Relaxation of the limbs 58.
the ne — w heaven stamped in the - — heart Remuneration in accordance with the
522; spir—it 547. fundamental direction of man 92.
Purify —(to) the mind (hear—t) 16, 75, Renunciation higher thangivingalms56.
555; — oneself from sin 64; the soul Repentance XXVII sqq., 11, 115, 11S,
475; the sight of the—soul 564. 132, 139, 179, 315, 317, 320, 337, 443
Purification XXVIII; — on account—of sq-, 453, 448, 461 sq., 494, 502, 507.
works 95; threefold— 161; second Resurrection of — the soul 246, cf. 282:
of the— mind 162; of the soul 18—4, — the wonder of 358 sq.; intelligible
243; of the body by service 304; 374-
of the inner being 447—. Revelation XXXI — X, 154 sqq., 161 sqq.,
Purity XXXVII sq.; of deliberatio—ns 247, 338, 545; —is silenc—e of intellect
the source of inw—ard light 17; natural 155; —six kinds of 156; and —truth
of the soul —25; of the mind 27, 306, 160; to the angels 1—99 sq.; and
513, 5—27; of the heart 29, 165, 250, vision 249; intelligible higher than
348; preserved by works and recita- purity 472; revelations usually take place
tion 91; — how it i—s effectuated 53, 128; in the night and in prayer 556.
r — ank of 162; during pray — er 169; Rufinus (ecclesiastical writer) 264.
— of emotion 209; the limits of 25—0; —
of the soul 253, 306,—519; true Sabbath and Sunday 202 sqq.; and
260; — bodily — and psychic 306; stage grave 203 sq.—
of — 381; and hidden thin—gs 438: Satan. What — means 1S9; the different
what — is 472; the harbour —of 489; ways inwhich • combatesthesolitary269.
partial - 49—4; repentance, and per- Scriptures. In—telligible ray between the
fection 5075 can only — be reached by words of the 6.
solitude 520; definition of 520. Scrutinizing — blamed 47.
Sens
—
es XXIX
;
ofthe(leshan
—
dofthesoul
Rapture 50, 156; cf. 171. — 9; haveto — besilen—t16,67; ofthesoul
Recitation 98, 218, 488; in solitude 29; inward 29; the last garment of

GKNKRAT. RI-XHSTKR 197
— — —
the mi — nd 31; must he — subdued 2S1 ; 1 of 246 sq.; and fasting 282; pre-
inner — 338, 374; silent 430; spiri- ferred to works 308 sqq., 464; practised
— tual of the mind 472, 475; spiritual I — by the Fathers of Scete 309; to dwell in
Seren o i f t t y he of s — o s u o l ul 51 1 4 6 . 7, 251, 350, 360, 3S4, I 313 i ; sf—ulfil a l n i d ngt c h o e nt t e w m o pl c a hi t e i f o — n co 3 m 3 m 9 a ; nd — men a t " s d
414, 492; of spirit 526 sq.; of mind I repentance 46—2; praise of 463 sq—.; the
113, 438; serene heart 67, 455; the se- mystery of 465; the aim of the
S S i e c r re k v n i n e c e e s 2 . s 59 . . Ps S y e c e hi l c ln — ess. 304; invisible — 30 — 7. j I — i h n a . rb 4 — o 6 u 8 r 4 ; 7 h o 9 f o ; w m s y t i s h m t e e p r l i i e n e t s e—ll 4 ig 6 e r 7 n e ; t je h t c a h t e e v d e pr 4 t o o 8 f 0 i d ; t w s e—l o l f
Sight XXXIX sq.,LI, 128,338;essential ! and the first gift of th—e mystic 490; no
49, 184, 195; caused by — works and watch- one who keeps perfect in our genera-
fulness — 128; spiritual — 9, 187, 304: I tion 491; a — pathy and — purity only to be
divine — 161; psychic 128,—162, 195, ! reached by — 520; compared —to the
l o 5 o n 4 v e 4 e ; , mo k t n io o n w d l l u e e r s d i s n g g e 166 p a ; r n a d k y i e n r — ds 16 o 2 4 f 2 ; 2 — ; 1 i S nn 2 e m s r a q k q e —. s ; , j I Sir g m e r e n a r v ' c e s y 5 s 5 4 o 6 0 n 6 ; g s 3 q 2 q 7 . . r — ecommended 564; and
260; c — ontemplation is interp—reted spiritual ; Songs. Spiritual 216. —
5
2
4
6
,
0;
320;
of
tr
G
ue
od —306
w
,
ou
3
l —
2
d
4;
make
an
t
d
he
he
w
a
o
r
r
i
l
n
d
g
I
So
d
u
o
l
m
X
1
X
2
X
:
.
p
L
u
a
p
d
il
der
of
f
t
r
h
o
e
m —the
17;
to
its
the
na
k
t
i
u
n
ra
g
l
-
— stand still—336; simple 377; intelligible inclinations unto God 20; its nature 21;
Signs. 47 T 2 h ; atwe of sh w o h u a ld t n i o s t a d b es o i v r e e —natu 2 r 8 e 1 4 sq 9 q 7 . . i i 2 t 1 s , t 2 r 5 easu sq r . e ; s G 2 o 1 d ; 's nat i u m r a a g l e ly 2 n 1 o , t 1 a 2 f 6 f , ect 1 a 6 b 9 l ; e
Si — lence and solitude 154, 451: guarding j [ what is natural and not natural to it 23;
4 a 4 n 6 d ; ri— — ses a 3 f n 6 r d 0 o ; m tr — t u h t— r h ee a 4 n 4 d c 6 a ; u a s — n es a c f 2 a f 9 e u 2 c s t e ; e s d ec u h s u e t i a a o r s n t y I : j a s it r q s e q. n ; a pu t r u s i r o f a u i l l e s d he s a 1 — e l 8 e t 5 h ; on 2 e r 4 e ; s a u n —r n a r o t e t u c h r t e e i r on of w o h s f o e u n t ls he t 1 h— 8 e 2 y
with God 446; is—to be loved above 246; serene 360; becomes strong
all things 450, 451; a symbol of the ! by m — ortification 268; hidden mysteries of
future woild 470; mysterious silence of the 376.
God 471. — j : Splendour of the divine glory 8.—
Sin — . I d n o t e e s nt n i o o t nal exi a s n t d wi u t n h int G e o nt d io 1 na S l 9; —1 w 1 i 0 l ; l S S t u o n rk. 17, Mo 5 n 0, k 5 c 4 o , mp 5 a 2 r 1 e ; d i w n i t t e h lli t g h i e ble — 327 8 . 6;
Si n p n o o n t w e e a r r l s wa a a y n r s d c be e t v o a il n b d e in h l f a o l s v u e e n n d o c t e 1 a 4 l o , w f a 7 y 9 — s , b 3 2 e 4 e 0 8 n 8 , 1 s 3 8 q 5 9 q 0 . , ; g s 1 o e S e c 3 s o ; n i d t g s r — n a o c c e t , 4 u 7 r 3 t n . h a e lw i a n y tel b l e i h g i ib n l d e th — e — m 4 o 7 u 3 nt 5 ai t n h s e
408, 456 sq. — Sunday and Sabbath 202 sqq.; symbol
Sleep — ing and waking 454; which is of true knowledge 202.
not 486; the mystic speaks with God
—
Sm i a n l h — l is t s h l i e n e g p s. 26 T 2; he pra t y r e e r me d n u d r o i u n s g in - fl 2 u 5 e 9 n . ce Tea 22 r 1 s , . —4 S 9 e 0 e , al 4 s 9 o 2 s. sq v . . , W 4 e 9 e 9 p ; in — g — ;9 a 8 t , tra 1 c 3 t 1, gr 1 a 3 c 9 e ,
of 287 sq. 48; and fasting 48; when — grace
Socrates, the historian 263. opens a man's eyes 49; — perpetual 58;
Solitary has a higher rank than he that when the fountai—n of — is given 73;
gives alms 56; his behaviour the pride of what conies after 94; as acriterium
So c t l h o i e m t p a c a r h r u y e r d ch l t if o e 1 a 1 n 9 1 ; 1 u 7 n hi f s a s t q w q h . o o ; r ma k b i l t 1 s e 50 b s . e e a a ut 1 y 25; 11 o 9 n ; I j : o— p f etu t a 1 h l 2 e — 6, s — ol 1 i 2 t 8 a s , r t y' o s p 397 s , t 1 a 2 t 4 7 e 4 ; 3 1 , 2 w 5 4 h 8 e s 9 q n ; . ;w — p h e e r u p b e e t P g u e i a v l n "
the solitary career 127 sqq. 1 128; — quicken the cold emoti — ons 131;
So
2
l
1
i
;
tu
— —
de
is
XX
mo
X
r
I
e
V
th
sq
a
.
n
,
a
a
ll
f
s
e
i
n
g
c
n
e
s
t
a
o
n
t
d
he
p
s
o
e
w
n
e
s
r
e
s
s
o
s
f
we
g
e
r
t
ace
—165
—
,
177
2
;
29—, 4
a
84,
sig
5
n
55"
o
,
f begi
a
nn
s
i
i
n
g
g
n
45; — is higher than missionary — work fruits 244; a sign of the transition
45; and ec—stasy 139—; the right 149; f — rom the bodily to the spiritual state 24—5 ;
definition of — 154- and purity 162; and the love of— God 245;—effects of
mysteries of —'63; wo — rks have to be 245; delight of 25—2; caused by
combined with 243; is the begin- —love 261 ; iuimesurable ISi; perpetu—al
— ning of the purification of the soul 243; during prayer a charisma 38—4;
expels the affections 244; the effects originate in pure meditation 385; did

;
>)98 GENERAL REGISTER
—
not—leave Paul for three y—ears 397: gift ! 44S ; as a means to recog — nize one's
of during service 446; —the accom-
I
own degree of disc—ipline 4S3
;
happen
plishment of—prayer 446; born from
j
to every man 494; comparedtochanges
s s i p g o h n t tan 4 e 5 o 1 u ; s — — a du s r i i g n n g of pr a a p y p e r r oa 4 c 6 h 0 i , ng 5 v 4 i 7 c ; - I I Vi o g f il t s he 5 w 2 e , ath 1 e 3 r 4 4 s 9 q 5 q . ., 450, 469,488, 546
tory 480; when —the mind gazes at
I
sqq.. 563 sq.
s—piri
d
t
u
u
r—
a
i
l
ng
thi
p
n
r
g
a
s
ye
4
r
92
ca
;
use f
d
o
u
r
r
g
i
i
n
ve
g
ne
s
s
l
s
eep
of
4
s
9
i
2
n
;
s I
I
Vision. See Sight.
e 5 m 43 pt! — atio du n r s ing 34 vigi s l q s q. 5 ; 48.— of the soul I I We h a is kn o e — w s n s. — Ma 1 n 04, has 107 to s b q e .; c s o i n n s s ci a o r u i s sin o g f
and of the body 35 sq.; are necessary from 110. —
36, 104, 109; we should not seek them j Weepin — g. See also s.v. Tears; psychic
37; are not to be sh — unned in—criticalcases j 88; is—jthe meditation of th—e solitary
37; divine help in 65; —in accor—d-
!
251 sq.; and —purity 252; expels
a a n n c d e d w i i v t i h ne gi h ft e s lp 29 3 8 0 ; 3; ki b n y ds — of the 2 g 9 a 9 t ; e of J
;
t p h r e ay a i f n f g ect f i o o r ns hu 2 m 5 i— 3 li ; ty w a i n th dc — onso 4 l 1 a 2 tio sq n . 253 ;
h — eav a e r n e i a s dm — o it p t e e n d ed 42 4 7 1 ; 8; —for he w a h l ic t h he ca i u n s n e e s r I I W W i o n m e e . n. Spi T ri h t e ua r l eprese 3 n 1 t 7 a . tion ofbeautiful — —
m
h mi a
a
t v
n
t e ed
4
r
8
e
3
b a
;
y ch g e r d ac
a
e p
l
a
s
r
o
5 t 3 ia
a
; l
dm
—
i
p
t
u
t
r s i
e
h t
d
y ou
t
l 4
o
d 94
t
n
h
; o
o
t
s—e
ca
w
u a
h
s d
o
e - I j Wo i
2
s r
77
k a
,
m
2
( i
8
m g
4
a h
;
n t u y a
r
l
e
w
f
)
r
e
a
a 4
i
p 4
n
o
i
9
n
; n
g
—2
f
9
r
3
o
. c
m
al
t
l
h
e
e
d
s
a
i
n
ght
im
o
p
f
ed—i-
despair 365. ment —57; it is profitable to give up
heodorc, one of the confessors 264. 130; unfi—t for the solitary 152 sq.;
heodi cy 189 sqq. precepts for 3S5.
heodoreofMopsucsti — a.SeeCommentator. Works — and humility m — ake man a God
heory. Practice and 15. —95; and trust 102; and faith 102;
hings (outward, worldly) 2, 3, 8, 10, 14, ha — ve to be combined with solitude
21, 48, 54, 61, 89, 93, 135, 251, 276, 243; without humility caus — e many evils
43», 486, 536. 499; solitude preferable to 3—85. —
ranee 208, 220. World. How to be far from the 18;
r
r
— e
an
a
s
s
i
u
t
r
i
y
on
16
1
5
4
;
1,
—
15s,
wit
1
h
7
i
1
n
.
man 12, 528;
a
fr
n
o
d
m
a
t
f
h
f
e
e
—
c—tion
4
s
0;
iS
t
;
o w
m
i
a
t
n
hd
h
r
a
a
s
wf
to
ro
b
m
e
th
w
e
ea
si
n
g
e
h
d
t
of the soul 520. of the 5—2; to renunci — ate the whole
r r e e e e o of f g li o f o e d is a t n h d e e d v iv i i l ne th l e ov e e rad 3 i 1 c 6 a . tor of b th o e dy so o l f it t a h ry e 's s 7 e 8 r—v ; a h nt ow 1 t 0 h 0 e ; — ma c y o b m e p c a o re m d e
love 371. to a whore 227; compa — red to a pris—on
rust. See Confidence. — 229; how to give up the 130;what
ruth has to be sought 122; divine means 332.
cannot be acquired by nature 192. World to be perceiv — ed here already 12
remuneration in the not to b — e expec-
Unconsciousness 22:. ted 55; two states only in the — 87 sq.
UnificationXXVI,XLIV,8,169,194,462. spiritual degrees of—those in 86 —sq.;
the things of the '69; in the no
Varying states XLV, 112,124,129,139, recollection of this world 257.
179 sq., 192, 206, 213 sq., 216, 219, 24—6, Written documents and laws necessary
298 , 3'4, 416, 453, 492, 500,—505; or him that has not received the Com-
servetomakeam — anhumble 109; ofcold forter 91.
and h—eat 137; of light and darkne—ss
—
339; purified by prayer 441; good Zeal condemned343sq.; laudable 395sq.

QUOTATIONS FROM THE BIBLE
page page
Genesis 3, 19 203 Psalms 84,11 97, 231
» 48,22 9 » 90,10 231
Exodus 20, 19 574sq. „ 91,5 387
„ 24,9—u 175 n 91,II sq 394
» 32,32 509 * 91, 13 362
Lev. 26,36 280
»
9i,i5 103
D N e um «t b - . 6, 1 5 3,33 31 9 2 6 „ i) 1 11 2 9 6 , .6 '23 , 4 04 1
Judges 3, I sq 107 „ 127,1 364
2 Sam. 7. 1 4S5 138,7 390
» I2,I3 117 145, 19 270
1 Kings 8, 11 222 » 147,3 458
Jcs. 6, 1 i57 Job 1,9 278
n 37,35 390 „ 14,20 461
» 40,4 512 Proverbs 6,27 14
j> 52 , 15 40 n I°,4 *78
» 53,6 4o „ 16, 19 411
» 53,10 40 22, 13 96
» 55,2 — sq 74 25,28 51
11 55,6 8 74 „ 28, I 103
i) 58 ,2 sq 82, iot „ 28, 13 74
" 6l>' 458 Ecclesiastcs 10, 16 223
» 65>2 73 '11, 1 55
Jcr- 20,9 5t2 Ecclcsiiisticus 1, I 205
» 3*3,2 sq ?4 Matthew 5,4 253
Ezckiel 9,6 117 5,7 456
» 33,n 73 6,7 33
11 33, 18 sq 74 „ 6, 10 13
» 36 , 26 246 6,25 100
Micah 7,8 112 „ 6,31 sq 33
Psalms 1,5 114 6,33 IOO, 385
.. 6,6 558 » 7,7 sq 502
25,9 579 7,12 574
34,7 392 8,n 88
i) 34, to 398 8,20 581
34, 15 93 „ 10,26 364
» 34,i6 394 10,28 35
» 34, 19 392 10,38,39 35, 233
v 35, 10 490 „ 11,28 352
n 36,9 473 » 11,29 5i6
„ 37,35 39o „ 12,31 458
42,2 131 13,43 8S
,,
„ 49, 12,20 319 14, 13 3<J4
5i,i7 105 15, '4 90
» 55,22 398 „ 16, 16 159
» 55,23 67 „ 16,24 232, 532

4-00 QUOTATIONS FROM THE BIBLE
page page
Matthew 18,3 361, 527 1 Cor. 3,18 525
19, 27 J48 „ 8,1 371
n 20,22 36 „ 12,2—4 50
„ 21,22 364 » 13, '2 13, '59
22,21 152 n IS, I0 371
r,
25,32 8S 2 Cor. 4,6 246
25,41 88 „ 5,21 — 40
„ 26,26,28 510 „ 12,2 4 50
,, 26,41 35, 502, 556 12,7 428
Mark 2, 17 458 » 12,7 sq 428, 504
i) 9,23 365 Galatians 5, 17 26
n 16, 17 365 * 5,22 344
Luke 1,35 390 6,7 459
t, n
„ 11,8 502 Ejihesians I, 159
* 13,24 35 1,17—19 15S, 391
» 14,33 439, 5" r, 4,22,24 52J
„ 17,20 sq 378 5,l6 325
„ 17,21 13, 378 „ IO, 18 sq 392
18,I 502 Colossinns 1,9 158
„ 21,36 502, 556 1,24 509
John i,i 159 » 3, 1 246
„ 3, »6 509 3, 5 16, 148
„ M,3o 581 4,5 325
„ 16,13 -377 Pbilippians 1,29 417
„ l6 ,33 426 r, 2,3 250
„ 21,16 458 v 2, 13 442
Acts 10, 10 155 n 4,4 s'l 364
Romans 3,23 sq 315 4,5 39S
8,15 299, 364, 375, 539 4,13 37i
„ 8,21 256 1 Thess. 5,17 556
8,38 487 2 Thess. 2,13 391
v 9,3 464, 5°9 1 Tim. 1,15 258
„ 9, 16 464 Hebrews 5, 14 89
",32 sq 159 „ 12,2 510
",33 193, 255 I Peter 3,14 417
I Cor. 2,9 12, 316 1 John 4,16 316

